PEP: 8103
Title: 2022 Term steering council election
Version: $Revision$
Last-Modified: $Date$
Author: Ewa Jodlowska <ewa@python.org>, Ee W. Durbin III <ee@python.org>, Joe Carey <joe@python.org>
Sponsor: Barry Warsaw <barry@python.org>
Status: Active
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 04-Oct-2021


Abstract
========

This document describes the schedule and other details of the December
2021 election for the Python steering council, as specified in
PEP 13. This is the steering council election for the 2022 term
(i.e. Python 3.11).


Election Administration
=======================

The steering council appointed the
`Python Software Foundation <https://www.python.org/psf-landing/>`__
Director of Infrastructure, Ee Durbin
and Accounting Manager, Joe Carey, to coadminister the election.

`Python Software Foundation <https://www.python.org/psf-landing/>`__
Executive Director, Ewa Jodlowska, will communicate announcements
regarding the election.


Schedule
========

There will be a two-week nomination period, followed by a two-week
vote.

The nomination period was: November 1, 2021 through November 16, 2021 12:00 UTC
(The end of November 15, 2021 `Anywhere on Earth
<https://www.ieee802.org/16/aoe.html>`_). As announced on `python-committers
<https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-committers@python.org/thread/6WDCGUKBOVG2FIPOGTPYXD3OA2KDJLLO/>`_,
and took place on `discuss.python.org <https://discuss.python.org/c/core-dev/steering-council-nominations>`_.

The voting period is: December 1, 2021 12:00 UTC through December 16, 2021
12:00 UTC (The end of December 15, 2021 `Anywhere on Earth
<https://www.ieee802.org/16/aoe.html>`_).


Candidates
==========

Candidates must be nominated by a core team member. If the candidate
is a core team member, they may nominate themselves.

Nominees (in alphabetical order):

- `Brett Cannon <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-brett-cannon-2022-term/11839>`_
- `Mariatta <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-mariatta-2022-term/11979>`_
- `David Mertz <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-david-mertz-2022-term/12000>`_
- `Dong-hee Na <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-dong-hee-na-2022-term/12001>`_
- `Pablo Galindo Salgado <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-pablo-galindo-2022-term/11947>`_
- `Gregory P. Smith <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-gregory-p-smith-2022-term/11999>`_
- `Victor Stinner <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-victor-stinner-2022-term/11981>`_
- `Petr Viktorin <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-petr-viktorin-2022-term/12003>`_
- `Barry Warsaw <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-barry-warsaw-2022-term/11911>`_
- `Thomas Wouters <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-thomas-wouters-2022-term/11946>`_

Withdrawn nominations:

- None

Voter Roll
==========

All active Python core team members are eligible to vote. Active status
is determined as described in `PEP 13 <https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0013/#membership>`_
and implemented via the software at `python/voters <https://github.com/python/voters>`_ [1]_.

Ballots will be distributed based on the `The Python Voter Roll for this
election
<https://github.com/python/voters/blob/master/voter-files/>`_
[1]_.

While this file is not public as it contains private email addresses, the
`Complete Voter Roll`_ by name will be made available when the roll is
created.

Election Implementation
=======================

The election will be conducted using the `Helios Voting Service
<https://heliosvoting.org>`__.


Configuration
-------------

Short name: ``2022-python-steering-council``

Name: ``2022 Python Steering Council Election``

Description: ``Election for the Python steering council, as specified in PEP 13. This is steering council election for the 2022 term.``

type: ``Election``

Use voter aliases: ``[X]``

Randomize answer order: ``[X]``

Private: ``[X]``

Help Email Address: ``psf-election@python.org``

Voting starts at: ``December 1, 2021 00:00 UTC``

Voting ends at: ``December 16, 2021 12:00 UTC``

This will create an election in which:

* Voting is not open to the public, only those on the `Voter Roll`_ may
  participate. Ballots will be emailed when voting starts.
* Candidates are presented in random order, to help avoid bias.
* Voter identities and ballots are protected against cryptographic advances.

Questions
---------

Question 1
~~~~~~~~~~

Select between ``0`` and ``- (approval)`` answers. Result Type: ``absolute``

Question: ``Select candidates for the Python Steering Council``

Answer #1 - #N: ``Candidates from Candidates_ Section``



Results
=======

- TBD


Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.


Complete Voter Roll
===================

Active Python core developers
-----------------------------

::

	Abhilash Raj
	Alex Gaynor
	Ammar Askar
	Andrew Kuchling
	Andrew Svetlov
	Antoine Pitrou
	Barry Warsaw
	Batuhan Taskaya
	Benjamin Peterson
	Berker Peksağ
	Brandt Bucher
	Brett Cannon
	Brian Curtin
	Brian Quinlan
	Carol Willing
	Cheryl Sabella
	Chris Jerdonek
	Chris Withers
	Christian Heimes
	Dino Viehland
	Dong-hee Na
	Éric Araujo
	Eric Snow
	Eric V. Smith
	Ethan Furman
	Facundo Batista
	Fred Drake
	Giampaolo Rodolà
	Gregory P. Smith
	Guido van Rossum
	Hynek Schlawack
	Inada Naoki
	Irit Katriel
	Ivan Levkivskyi
	Jason R. Coombs
	Jeremy Kloth
	Jesús Cea
	Joannah Nanjekye
	Julien Palard
	Karthikeyan Singaravelan
	Ken Jin
	Kushal Das
	Kyle Stanley
	Larry Hastings
	Lisa Roach
	Łukasz Langa
	Lysandros Nikolaou
	Marc-André Lemburg
	Mariatta
	Mark Dickinson
	Mark Shannon
	Nathaniel J. Smith
	Ned Deily
	Neil Schemenauer
	Nick Coghlan
	Pablo Galindo
	Paul Ganssle
	Paul Moore
	Petr Viktorin
	Raymond Hettinger
	Ronald Oussoren
	Senthil Kumaran
	Serhiy Storchaka
	Stefan Behnel
	Stéphane Wirtel
	Steve Dower
	Tal Einat
	Terry Jan Reedy
	Thomas Wouters
	Tim Golden
	Tim Peters
	Victor Stinner
	Vinay Sajip
	Xiang Zhang
	Yury Selivanov
	Zachary Ware


.. [1] This repository is private and accessible only to Python Core
   Developers, administrators, and Python Software Foundation Staff as it
   contains personal email addresses.



..
  Local Variables:
  mode: indented-text
  indent-tabs-mode: nil
  sentence-end-double-space: t
  fill-column: 70
  coding: utf-8
  End:
