PEP: 694
Title: Upload 2.0 API for Python Package Repositories
Author: Donald Stufft <donald@stufft.io>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-694-upload-2-0-api-for-python-package-repositories/16879
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 11-Jun-2022
Post-History: `27-Jun-2022 <https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-694-upload-2-0-api-for-python-package-repositories/16879>`__


Abstract
========

There is currently no standardized API for uploading files to a Python package
repository such as PyPI. Instead, everyone has been forced to reverse engineer
the non-standard API from PyPI.

That API, while functional, leaks a lot of implementation details of the original
PyPI code base, which have now had to have been faithfully replicated in the new
code base, and alternative implementations.

Beyond the above, there are a number of major issues with the current API:

- It is a fully synchronous API, which means that we're forced to have a single
  request being held open for potentially a long time, both for the upload itself,
  and then while the repository processes the uploaded file to determine success
  or failure.

- It does not support any mechanism for resuming an upload, with the largest file
  size on PyPI being just under 1GB in size, that's a lot of wasted bandwidth if
  a large file has a network blip towards the end of an upload.

- It treats a single file as the atomic unit of operation, which can be problematic
  when a release might have multiple binary wheels which can cause people to get
  different versions while the files are uploading, and if the sdist happens to
  not go last, possibly some hard to build packages are attempting to be built
  from source.

- It has very limited support for communicating back to the user, with no support 
  for multiple errors, warnings, deprecations, etc. It is limited entirely to the 
  HTTP status code and reason phrase, of which the reason phrase has been 
  deprecated since HTTP/2 (:rfc:`RFC 7540 <7540#section-8.1.2.4>`). 

- The metadata for a release/file is submitted alongside the file, however this
  metadata is famously unreliable, and most installers instead choose to download
  the entire file and read that in part due to that unreliability.

- There is no mechanism for allowing a repository to do any sort of sanity
  checks before bandwidth starts getting expended on an upload, whereas a lot
  of the cases of invalid metadata or incorrect permissions could be checked
  prior to upload.

- It has no support for "staging" a draft release prior to publishing it to the
  repository.

- It has no support for creating new projects, without uploading a file.

This PEP proposes a new API for uploads, and deprecates the existing non standard
API.


Status Quo
==========

This does not attempt to be a fully exhaustive documentation of the current API, but
give a high level overview of the existing API.


Endpoint
--------

The existing upload API (and the now removed register API) lives at an url, currently
``https://upload.pypi.org/legacy/``, and to communicate which specific API you want
to call, you add a ``:action`` url parameter with a value of ``file_upload``. The values
of ``submit``, ``submit_pkg_info``, and ``doc_upload`` also used to be supported, but
no longer are.

It also has a ``protocol_version`` parameter, in theory to allow new versions of the
API to be written, but in practice that has never happened, and the value is always
``1``.

So in practice, on PyPI, the endpoint is
``https://upload.pypi.org/legacy/?:action=file_upload&protocol_version=1``.



Encoding
--------

The data to be submitted is submitted as a ``POST`` request with the content type
of ``multipart/form-data``. This is due to the historical nature, that this API
was not actually designed as an API, but rather was a form on the initial PyPI
implementation, then client code was written to programmatically submit that form.


Content
-------

Roughly speaking, the metadata contained within the package is submitted as parts
where the content-disposition is ``form-data``, and the name is the name of the
field. The names of these various pieces of metadata are not documented, and they
sometimes, but not always match the names used in the ``METADATA`` files. The casing
rarely matches though, but overall the ``METADATA`` to ``form-data`` conversion is
extremely inconsistent.

The file itself is then sent as a ``application/octet-stream`` part with the name
of ``content``, and if there is a PGP signature attached, then it will be included
as a ``application/octet-stream`` part with the name of ``gpg_signature``.


Specification
=============

This PEP traces the root cause of most of the issues with the existing API to be
roughly two things:

- The metadata is submitted alongside the file, rather than being parsed from the
  file itself.

  - This is actually fine if used as a pre-check, but it should be validated
    against the actual ``METADATA`` or similar files within the distribution.

- It supports a single request, using nothing but form data, that either succeeds
  or fails, and everything is done and contained within that single request.

We then propose a multi-request workflow, that essentially boils down to:

1. Initiate an upload session.
2. Upload the file(s) as part of the upload session.
3. Complete the upload session.
4. (Optional) Check the status of an upload session.

All URLs described here will be relative to the root endpoint, which may be
located anywhere within the url structure of a domain. So it could be at
``https://upload.example.com/``, or ``https://example.com/upload/``.


Versioning
----------

This PEP uses the same ``MAJOR.MINOR`` versioning system as used in :pep:`691`,
but it is otherwise independently versioned. The existing API is considered by
this spec to be version ``1.0``, but it otherwise does not attempt to modify
that API in any way.


Endpoints
---------

Create an Upload Session
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To create a new upload session, you can send a ``POST`` request to ``/``,
with a payload that looks like:

.. code-block:: json

    {
      "meta": {
        "api-version": "2.0"
      },
      "name": "foo",
      "version": "1.0"
    }


This currently has three keys, ``meta``, ``name``, and ``version``.

The ``meta`` key is included in all payloads, and it describes information about the
payload itself.

The ``name`` key is the name of the project that this session is attempting to
add files to.

The ``version`` key is the version of the project that this session is attepmting to
add files to.

If creating the session was successful, then the server must return a response
that looks like:

.. code-block:: json

    {
      "meta": {
        "api-version": "2.0"
      },
      "urls": {
        "upload": "...",
        "draft": "...",
        "publish": "..."
      },
      "valid-for": 604800,
      "status": "pending",
      "files": {},
      "notices": [
        "a notice to display to the user"
      ]
    }


Besides the ``meta`` key, this response has five keys, ``urls``, ``valid-for``,
``status``, ``files``, and ``notices``.

The ``urls`` key is a dictionary mapping identifiers to related URLs to this
session.

The ``valid-for`` key is an integer representing how long, in seconds, until the
server itself will expire this session (and thus all of the URLs contained in it).
The session **SHOULD** live at least this much longer unless the client itself
has canceled the session. Servers **MAY** choose to *increase* this time, but should
never *decrease* it, except naturally through the passage of time.

The ``status`` key is a string that contains one of ``pending``, ``published``,
``errored``, or ``canceled``, this string represents the overall status of
the session.

The ``files`` key is a mapping containing the filenames that have been uploaded
to this session, to a mapping containing details about each file.

The ``notices`` key is an optional key that points to an array of notices that
the server wishes to communicate to the end user that are not specific to any
one file.

For each filename in ``files`` the mapping has three keys, ``status``, ``url``,
and ``notices``.

The ``status`` key is the same as the top level ``status`` key, except that it
indicates the status of a specific file.

The ``url`` key is the *absolute* URL that the client should upload that specific
file to (or use to delete that file).

The ``notices`` key is an optional key, that is an array of notices that the server
wishes to communicate to the end user that are specific to this file.

The required response code to a successful creation of the session is a
``201 Created`` response and it **MUST** include a ``Location`` header that is the
URL for this session, which may be used to check its status or cancel it.

For the ``urls`` key, there are currently three keys that may appear:

The ``upload`` key, which is the upload endpoint for this session to initiate
a file upload.

The ``draft`` key, which is the repository URL that these files are available at
prior to publishing.

The ``publish`` key, which is the endpoint to trigger publishing the session.


In addition to the above, if a second session is created for the same name+version
pair, then the upload server **MUST** return the already existing session rather
than creating a new, empty one.


Upload Each File
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once you have initiated an upload session for one or more files, then you have
to actually upload each of those files.

There is no set endpoint for actually uploading the file, that is given to the
client by the server as part of the creation of the upload session, and clients
**MUST NOT** assume that there is any commonality to what those URLs look like from
one session to the next.

To initiate a file upload, a client sends a ``POST`` request to the upload URL
in the session, with a request body that looks like:

.. code-block:: json

    {
      "meta": {
        "api-version": "2.0"
      },
      "filename": "foo-1.0.tar.gz",
      "size": 1000,
      "hashes": {"sha256": "...", "blake2b": "..."},
      "metadata": "..."
    }


Besides the standard ``meta`` key, this currently has 4 keys:

- ``filename``: The filename of the file being uploaded.
- ``size``: The size, in bytes, of the file that is being uploaded.
- ``hashes``: A mapping of hash names to hex encoded digests, each of these digests
  are the digests of that file, when hashed by the hash identified in the name.

  By default, any hash algorithm available via `hashlib
  <https://docs.python.org/3/library/hashlib.html>`_ (specifically any that can
  be passed to ``hashlib.new()`` and do not require additional parameters) can
  be used as a key for the hashes dictionary. At least one secure algorithm from
  ``hashlib.algorithms_guaranteed`` **MUST** always be included. At the time
  of this PEP, ``sha256`` specifically is recommended.

  Multiple hashes may be passed at a time, but all hashes must be valid for the
  file.
- ``metadata``: An optional key that is a string containing the file's
  `core metadata <https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/core-metadata/>`_.

Servers **MAY** use the data provided in this response to do some sanity checking
prior to allowing the file to be uploaded, which may include but is not limited
to:

- Checking if the ``filename`` already exists.
- Checking if the ``size`` would invalidate some quota.
- Checking if the contents of the ``metadata``, if provided, are valid.

If the server determines that the client should attempt the upload, it will return
a ``201 Created`` response, with an empty body, and a ``Location`` header pointing
to the URL that the file itself should be uploaded to.

At this point, the status of the session should show the filename, with the above url
included in it.


Upload Data
+++++++++++

To upload the file, a client has two choices, they may upload the file as either
a single chunk, or as multiple chunks. Either option is acceptable, but it is
recommended that most clients should choose to upload each file as a single chunk
as that requires fewer requests and typically has better performance.

However for particularly large files, uploading within a single request may result
in timeouts, so larger files may need to be uploaded in multiple chunks.

In either case, the client must generate a unique token (or nonce) for each upload
attempt for a file, and **MUST** include that token in each request in the ``Upload-Token``
header. The ``Upload-Token`` is a binary blob encoded using base64 surrounded by
a ``:`` on either side. Clients **SHOULD** use at least 32 bytes of cryptographically
random data. You can generate it using the following:

.. code-block:: python

    import base64
    import secrets

    header = ":" + base64.b64encode(secrets.token_bytes(32)).decode() + ":"

The one time that it is permissible to omit the ``Upload-Token`` from an upload
request is when a client wishes to opt out of the resumable or chunked file upload
feature completely. In that case, they **MAY** omit the ``Upload-Token``, and the
file must be successfully uploaded in a single HTTP request, and if it fails, the
entire file must be resent in another single HTTP request.

To upload in a single chunk, a client sends a ``POST`` request to the URL from the
session response for that filename. The client **MUST** include a ``Content-Length``
header that is equal to the size of the file in bytes, and this **MUST** match the
size given in the original session creation.

As an example, if uploading a 100,000 byte file, you would send headers like::

    Content-Length: 100000
    Upload-Token: :nYuc7Lg2/Lv9S4EYoT9WE6nwFZgN/TcUXyk9wtwoABg=:

If the upload completes successfully, the server **MUST** respond with a
``201 Created`` status. At this point this file **MUST** not be present in the
repository, but merely staged until the upload session has completed.

To upload in multiple chunks, a client sends multiple ``POST`` requests to the same
URL as before, one for each chunk.

This time however, the ``Content-Length`` is equal to the size, in bytes, of the
chunk that they are sending. In addition, the client **MUST** include a
``Upload-Offset`` header which indicates a byte offset that the content included
in this request starts at and a ``Upload-Incomplete`` header set to ``1``.

As an example, if uploading a 100,000 byte file in 1000 byte chunks, and this chunk
represents bytes 1001 through 2000, you would send headers like::

    Content-Length: 1000
    Upload-Token: :nYuc7Lg2/Lv9S4EYoT9WE6nwFZgN/TcUXyk9wtwoABg=:
    Upload-Offset: 1001
    Upload-Incomplete: 1

However, the **final** chunk of data omits the ``Upload-Incomplete`` header, since
at that point the upload is no longer incomplete.

For each successful chunk, the server **MUST** respond with a ``202 Accepted``
header, except for the final chunk, which **MUST** be a ``201 Created``.

The following constraints are placed on uploads regardless of whether they are
single chunk or multiple chunks:

- A client **MUST NOT** perform multiple ``POST`` requests in parallel for the
  same file to avoid race conditions and data loss or corruption. The server
  **MAY** terminate any ongoing ``POST`` request that utilizes the same
  ``Upload-Token``.
- If the offset provided in ``Upload-Offset`` is not ``0`` or the next chunk
  in an incomplete upload, then the server **MUST** respond with a 409 Conflict.
- Once an upload has started with a specific token, you may not use another token
  for that file without deleting the in progress upload.
- Once a file has uploaded successfully, you may initiate another upload for
  that file, and doing so will replace that file.


Resume Upload
+++++++++++++

To resume an upload, you first have to know how much of the data the server has
already received, regardless of if you were originally uploading the file as
a single chunk, or in multiple chunks.

To get the status of an individual upload, a client can make a ``HEAD`` request
with their existing ``Upload-Token`` to the same URL they were uploading to.

The server **MUST** respond back with a ``204 No Content`` response, with an
``Upload-Offset`` header that indicates what offset the client should continue
uploading from. If the server has not received any data, then this would be ``0``,
if it has received 1007 bytes then it would be ``1007``.

Once the client has retrieved the offset that they need to start from, they can
upload the rest of the file as described above, either in a single request
containing all of the remaining data or in multiple chunks.


Canceling an In Progress Upload
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

If a client wishes to cancel an upload of a specific file, for instance because
they need to upload a different file, they may do so by issuing a ``DELETE``
request to the file upload URL with the ``Upload-Token`` used to upload the
file in the first place.

A successful cancellation request **MUST** response with a ``204 No Content``.


Delete an uploaded File
+++++++++++++++++++++++

Already uploaded files may be deleted by issuing a ``DELETE`` request to the file
upload URL without the ``Upload-Token``.

A successful deletion request **MUST** response with a ``204 No Content``.


Session Status
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Similarly to file upload, the session URL is provided in the response to
creating the upload session, and clients **MUST NOT** assume that there is any
commonality to what those URLs look like from one session to the next.

To check the status of a session, clients issue a ``GET`` request to the
session URL, to which the server will respond with the same response that
they got when they initially created the upload session, except with any
changes to ``status``, ``valid-for``, or updated ``files`` reflected.


Session Cancellation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To cancel an upload session, a client issues a ``DELETE`` request to the
same session URL as before. At which point the server marks the session as
canceled, **MAY** purge any data that was uploaded as part of that session,
and future attempts to access that session URL or any of the file upload URLs
**MAY** return a ``404 Not Found``.

To prevent a lot of dangling sessions, servers may also choose to cancel a
session on their own accord. It is recommended that servers expunge their
sessions after no less than a week, but each server may choose their own
schedule.


Session Completion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To complete a session, and publish the files that have been included in it,
a client **MUST** send a ``POST`` request to the ``publish`` url in the
session status payload.

If the server is able to immediately complete the session, it may do so
and return a ``201 Created`` response. If it is unable to immediately
complete the session (for instance, if it needs to do processing that may
take longer than reasonable in a single HTTP request), then it may return
a ``202 Accepted`` response.

In either case, the server should include a ``Location`` header pointing
back to the session status url, and if the server returned a ``202 Accepted``,
the client may poll that URL to watch for the status to change.


Errors
------

All Error responses that contain a body will have a body that looks like:

.. code-block:: json

    {
      "meta": {
        "api-version": "2.0"
      },
      "message": "...",
      "errors": [
        {
          "source": "...",
          "message": "..."
        }
      ]
    }

Besides the standard ``meta`` key, this has two top level keys, ``message``
and ``errors``.

The ``message`` key is a singular message that encapsulates all errors that
may have happened on this request.

The ``errors`` key is an array of specific errors, each of which contains
a ``source`` key, which is a string that indicates what the source of the
error is, and a ``messasge`` key for that specific error.

The ``message`` and ``source`` strings do not have any specific meaning, and
are intended for human interpretation to figure out what the underlying issue
was.


Content-Types
-------------

Like :pep:`691`, this PEP proposes that all requests and responses from the
Upload API will have a standard content type that describes what the content
is, what version of the API it represents, and what serialization format has
been used.

The structure of this content type will be:

.. code-block:: text

    application/vnd.pypi.upload.$version+format

Since only major versions should be disruptive to systems attempting to
understand one of these API content bodies, only the major version will be
included in the content type, and will be prefixed with a ``v`` to clarify
that it is a version number.

Unlike :pep:`691`, this PEP does not change the existing ``1.0`` API in any
way, so servers will be required to host the new API described in this PEP at
a different endpoint than the existing upload API.

Which means that for the new 2.0 API, the content types would be:

- **JSON:** ``application/vnd.pypi.upload.v2+json``

In addition to the above, a special "meta" version is supported named ``latest``,
whose purpose is to allow clients to request the absolute latest version, without
having to know ahead of time what that version is. It is recommended however,
that clients be explicit about what versions they support.

These content types **DO NOT** apply to the file uploads themselves, only to the
other API requests/responses in the upload API. The files themselves should use
the ``application/octet-stream`` content-type.


Version + Format Selection
--------------------------

Again similar to :pep:`691`, this PEP standardizes on using server-driven
content negotiation to allow clients to request different versions or
serialization formats, which includes the ``format`` url parameter.

Since this PEP expects the existing legacy ``1.0`` upload API to exist at a
different endpoint, and it currently only provides for JSON serialization, this
mechanism is not particularly useful, and clients only have a single version and
serialization they can request. However clients **SHOULD** be setup to handle
content negotiation gracefully in the case that additional formats or versions
are added in the future.


FAQ
===

Does this mean PyPI is planning to drop support for the existing upload API?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

At this time PyPI does not have any specific plans to drop support for the
existing upload API.

Unlike with :pep:`691` there are wide benefits to doing so, so it is likely
that we will want to drop support for it at some point in the future, but
until this API is implemented, and receiving broad use it would be premature
to make any plans for actually dropping support for it.


Is this Resumable Upload protocol based on anything?
----------------------------------------------------

Yes!

It's actually the protocol specified in an
`Active Internet-Draft <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-tus-httpbis-resumable-uploads-protocol/>`_,
where the authors took what they learned implementing `tus <https://tus.io/>`_
to provide the idea of resumable uploads in a wholly generic, standards based
way.

The only deviation we've made from that spec is that we don't use the
``104 Upload Resumption Supported`` informational response in the first
``POST`` request. This decision was made for a few reasons:

- The ``104 Upload Resumption Supported`` is the only part of that draft
  which does not rely entirely on things that are already supported in the
  existing standards, since it was adding a new informational status.
- Many clients and web frameworks don't support ``1xx`` informational
  responses in a very good way, if at all, adding it would complicate
  implementation for very little benefit.
- The purpose of the ``104 Upload Resumption Supported`` support is to allow
  clients to determine that an arbitrary endpoint that they're interacting
  with supports resumable uploads. Since this PEP is mandating support for
  that in servers, clients can just assume that the server they are
  interacting with supports it, which makes using it unneeded.
- In theory, if the support for ``1xx`` responses got resolved and the draft
  gets accepted with it in, we can add that in at a later date without
  changing the overall flow of the API.

There is a risk that the above draft doesn't get accepted, but even if it
does not, that doesn't actually affect us. It would just mean that our
support for resumable uploads is an application specific protocol, but is
still wholly standards compliant.


Open Questions
==============


Multipart Uploads vs tus
------------------------

This PEP currently bases the actual uploading of files on an internet draft
from tus.io that supports resumable file uploads.

That protocol requires a few things:

- That the client selects a secure ``Upload-Token`` that they use to identify
  uploading a single file.
- That if clients don't upload the entire file in one shot, that they have
  to submit the chunks serially, and in the correct order, with all but the
  final chunk having a ``Upload-Incomplete: 1`` header.
- Resumption of an upload is essentially just querying the server to see how
  much data they've gotten, then sending the remaining bytes (either as a single
  request, or in chunks).
- The upload implicitly is completed when the server successfully gets all of
  the data from the client.

This has one big benefit, that if a client doesn't care about resuming their
download, the work to support, from a client side, resumable uploads is able
to be completely ignored. They can just ``POST`` the file to the URL, and if
it doesn't succeed, they can just ``POST`` the whole file again.

The other benefit is that even if you do want to support resumption, you can
still just ``POST`` the file, and unless you *need* to resume the download,
that's all you have to do.

Another, possibly theoretical, benefit is that for hashing the uploaded files,
the serial chunks requirement means that the server can maintain hashing state
between requests, update it for each request, then write that file back to
storage. Unfortunately this isn't actually possible to do with Python's hashlib,
though there are some libraries like `Rehash <https://github.com/kislyuk/rehash>`_
that implement it, but they don't support every hash that hashlib does
(specifically not blake2 or sha3 at the time of writing).

We might also need to reconstitute the download for processing anyways to do
things like extract metadata, etc from it, which would make it a moot point.

The downside is that there is no ability to parallelize the upload of a single
file because each chunk has to be submitted serially.

AWS S3 has a similar API (and most blob stores have copied it either wholesale
or something like it) which they call multipart uploading.

The basic flow for a multipart upload is:

1. Initiate a Multipart Upload to get an Upload ID.
2. Break your file up into chunks, and upload each one of them individually.
3. Once all chunks have been uploaded, finalize the upload.
   - This is the step where any errors would occur.

It does not directly support resuming an upload, but it allows clients to
control the "blast radius" of failure by adjusting the size of each part
they upload, and if any of the parts fail, they only have to resend those
specific parts.

This has a big benefit in that it allows parallelization in uploading files,
allowing clients to maximize their bandwidth using multiple threads to send
the data.

We wouldn't need an explicit step (1), because our session would implicitly
initiate a multipart upload for each file.

It does have its own downsides:

- Clients have to do more work on every request to have something resembling
  resumable uploads. They would *have* to break the file up into multiple parts
  rather than just making a single POST request, and only needing to deal
  with the complexity if something fails.

- Clients that don't care about resumption at all still have to deal with
  the third explicit step, though they could just upload the file all as a
  single part.

  - S3 works around this by having another API for one shot uploads, but
    I'd rather not have two different APIs for uploading the same file.

- Verifying hashes gets somewhat more complicated. AWS implements hashing
  multipart uploads by hashing each part, then the overall hash is just a
  hash of those hashes, not of the content itself. We need to know the
  actual hash of the file itself for PyPI, so we would have to reconstitute
  the file and read its content and hash it once it's been fully uploaded,
  though we could still use the hash of hashes trick for checksumming the
  upload itself.

  - See above about whether this is actually a downside in practice, or
    if it's just in theory.

I lean towards the tus style resumable uploads as I think they're simpler
to use and to implement, and the main downside is that we possibly leave
some multi-threaded performance on the table, which I think that I'm
personally fine with?

I guess one additional benefit of the S3 style multi part uploads is that
you don't have to try and do any sort of protection against parallel uploads,
since they're just supported. That alone might erase most of the server side
implementation simplification.

Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
