PEP: 624
Title: Remove Py_UNICODE encoder APIs
Author: Inada Naoki <songofacandy@gmail.com>
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 06-Jul-2020
Python-Version: 3.11
Post-History: 08-Jul-2020


Abstract
========

This PEP proposes to remove deprecated ``Py_UNICODE`` encoder APIs in Python 3.11:

* ``PyUnicode_Encode()``
* ``PyUnicode_EncodeASCII()``
* ``PyUnicode_EncodeLatin1()``
* ``PyUnicode_EncodeUTF7()``
* ``PyUnicode_EncodeUTF8()``
* ``PyUnicode_EncodeUTF16()``
* ``PyUnicode_EncodeUTF32()``
* ``PyUnicode_EncodeUnicodeEscape()``
* ``PyUnicode_EncodeRawUnicodeEscape()``
* ``PyUnicode_EncodeCharmap()``
* ``PyUnicode_TranslateCharmap()``
* ``PyUnicode_EncodeDecimal()``
* ``PyUnicode_TransformDecimalToASCII()``

.. note::

   `PEP 623  <https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0623/>`_ propose to remove
   Unicode object APIs relating to ``Py_UNICODE``. On the other hand, this PEP
   is not relating to Unicode object. These PEPs are split because they have
   different motivation and need different discussion.


Motivation
==========

In general, reducing the number of APIs that have been deprecated for
a long time and have few users is a good idea for not only it
improves the maintainability of CPython, but it also helps API users
and other Python implementations.


Rationale
=========

Deprecated since Python 3.3
---------------------------

``Py_UNICODE`` and APIs using it have been deprecated since Python 3.3.


Inefficient
-----------

All of these APIs are implemented using ``PyUnicode_FromWideChar``.
So these APIs are inefficient when user want to encode Unicode
object.


Not used widely
---------------

When searching from top 4000 PyPI packages [1]_, only pyodbc use
these APIs.

* ``PyUnicode_EncodeUTF8()``
* ``PyUnicode_EncodeUTF16()``

pyodbc uses these APIs to encode Unicode object into bytes object.
So it is easy to fix it. [2]_


Alternative APIs
================

There are alternative APIs to accept ``PyObject *unicode`` instead of
``Py_UNICODE *``. Users can migrate to them.


========================================= ==========================================
Deprecated API                            Alternative APIs
========================================= ==========================================
``PyUnicode_Encode()``                    ``PyUnicode_AsEncodedString()``
``PyUnicode_EncodeASCII()``               ``PyUnicode_AsASCIIString()`` \(1)
``PyUnicode_EncodeLatin1()``              ``PyUnicode_AsLatin1String()`` \(1)
``PyUnicode_EncodeUTF7()``                \(2)
``PyUnicode_EncodeUTF8()``                ``PyUnicode_AsUTF8String()`` \(1)
``PyUnicode_EncodeUTF16()``               ``PyUnicode_AsUTF16String()`` \(3)
``PyUnicode_EncodeUTF32()``               ``PyUnicode_AsUTF32String()`` \(3)
``PyUnicode_EncodeUnicodeEscape()``       ``PyUnicode_AsUnicodeEscapeString()``
``PyUnicode_EncodeRawUnicodeEscape()``    ``PyUnicode_AsRawUnicodeEscapeString()``
``PyUnicode_EncodeCharmap()``             ``PyUnicode_AsCharmapString()`` \(1)
``PyUnicode_TranslateCharmap()``          ``PyUnicode_Translate()``
``PyUnicode_EncodeDecimal()``              \(4)
``PyUnicode_TransformDecimalToASCII()``    \(4)
========================================= ==========================================

Notes:

(1)
   ``const char *errors`` parameter is missing.

(2)
   There is no public alternative API. But user can use generic
   ``PyUnicode_AsEncodedString()`` instead.

(3)
   ``const char *errors, int byteorder`` parameters are missing.

(4)
   There is no direct replacement. But ``Py_UNICODE_TODECIMAL``
   can be used instead. CPython uses
   ``_PyUnicode_TransformDecimalAndSpaceToASCII`` for converting
   from Unicode to numbers instead.


Plan
====

Remove these APIs in Python 3.11. They have been deprecated already.

* ``PyUnicode_Encode()``
* ``PyUnicode_EncodeASCII()``
* ``PyUnicode_EncodeLatin1()``
* ``PyUnicode_EncodeUTF7()``
* ``PyUnicode_EncodeUTF8()``
* ``PyUnicode_EncodeUTF16()``
* ``PyUnicode_EncodeUTF32()``
* ``PyUnicode_EncodeUnicodeEscape()``
* ``PyUnicode_EncodeRawUnicodeEscape()``
* ``PyUnicode_EncodeCharmap()``
* ``PyUnicode_TranslateCharmap()``
* ``PyUnicode_EncodeDecimal()``
* ``PyUnicode_TransformDecimalToASCII()``


Alternative ideas
=================

Instead of just removing deprecated APIs, we may be able to use their
names with different signature.


Make some private APIs public
------------------------------

``PyUnicode_EncodeUTF7()`` doesn't have public alternative APIs.

Some APIs have alternative public APIs. But they are missing
``const char *errors`` or ``int byteorder`` parameters.

We can rename some private APIs and make them public to cover missing
APIs and parameters.

============================= ================================
 Rename to                     Rename from
============================= ================================
``PyUnicode_EncodeASCII()``    ``_PyUnicode_AsASCIIString()``
``PyUnicode_EncodeLatin1()``   ``_PyUnicode_AsLatin1String()``
``PyUnicode_EncodeUTF7()``     ``_PyUnicode_EncodeUTF7()``
``PyUnicode_EncodeUTF8()``     ``_PyUnicode_AsUTF8String()``
``PyUnicode_EncodeUTF16()``    ``_PyUnicode_EncodeUTF16()``
``PyUnicode_EncodeUTF32()``    ``_PyUnicode_EncodeUTF32()``
============================= ================================

Pros:

* We have more consistent API set.

Cons:

* We have more public APIs to maintain.
* Existing public APIs are enough for most use cases, and
  ``PyUnicode_AsEncodedString()`` can be used in other cases.


Replace ``Py_UNICODE*`` with ``Py_UCS4*``
-----------------------------------------

We can replace ``Py_UNICODE`` (typedef of ``wchar_t``) with
``Py_UCS4``. Since builtin codecs support UCS-4, we don't need to
convert ``Py_UCS4*`` string to Unicode object.


Pros:

* We have more consistent API set.
* User can encode UCS-4 string in C without creating Unicode object.

Cons:

* We have more public APIs to maintain.
* Applications which uses UTF-8 or UTF-16 can not use these APIs
  anyway.
* Other Python implementations may not have builtin codec for UCS-4.
* If we change the Unicode internal representation to UTF-8, we need
  to keep UCS-4 support only for these APIs.


Replace ``Py_UNICODE*`` with ``wchar_t*``
-----------------------------------------

We can replace ``Py_UNICODE`` to ``wchar_t``.

Pros:

* We have more consistent API set.
* Backward compatible.

Cons:

* We have more public APIs to maintain.
* They are inefficient on platforms ``wchar_t*`` is UTF-16. It is
  because built-in codecs supports only UCS-1, UCS-2, and UCS-4
  input.


Rejected ideas
==============

Using runtime warning
---------------------

These APIs doesn't release GIL for now. Emitting a warning from
such APIs is not safe. See this example.

.. code-block::

   PyObject *u = PyList_GET_ITEM(list, i);  // u is borrowed reference.
   PyObject *b = PyUnicode_EncodeUTF8(PyUnicode_AS_UNICODE(u),
           PyUnicode_GET_SIZE(u), NULL);
   // Assumes u is still living reference.
   PyObject *t = PyTuple_Pack(2, u, b);
   Py_DECREF(b);
   return t;

If we emit Python warning from ``PyUnicode_EncodeUTF8()``, warning
filters and other threads may change the ``list`` and ``u`` can be
a dangling reference after ``PyUnicode_EncodeUTF8()`` returned.



Discussions
===========

* `Plan to remove Py_UNICODE APis except PEP 623
  <https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/thread/S7KW2U6IGXZFBMGS6WSJB26NZIBW4OLE/#S7KW2U6IGXZFBMGS6WSJB26NZIBW4OLE>`_
* `bpo-41123: Remove Py_UNICODE APIs except PEP 623: <https://bugs.python.org/issue41123>`_


Objections
----------

* Removing these APIs removes ability to use codec without temporary Unicode.

  * Codecs can not encode Unicode buffer directly without temporary Unicode
    object since Python 3.3. All these APIs creates temporary Unicode object
    for now. So removing them doesn't reduce any abilities.

* Why not remove decoder APIs too?

  * They are part of stable ABI.

  * ``PyUnicode_DecodeASCII()`` and ``PyUnicode_DecodeUTF8()`` are used
    very widely. Deprecating them is not worth enough.

  * Decoder APIs can decode from byte buffer directly, without creating
    temporary bytes object. On the other hand, encoder APIs can not avoid
    temporary Unicode object.


References
==========

.. [1] Source package list chosen from top 4000 PyPI packages.
   (https://github.com/methane/notes/blob/master/2020/wchar-cache/package_list.txt)

.. [2] pyodbc -- Don't use PyUnicode_Encode API #792
   (https://github.com/mkleehammer/pyodbc/pull/792)

.. [3] Uncomment Py_DEPRECATED for Py_UNICODE APIs (GH-21318)
   (https://github.com/python/cpython/commit/9c3840870814493fed62e140cfa43c2883e12181)


Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.

..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
