pep-0631.rst, before:

PEP: 631
Title: Dependency specification in pyproject.toml based on PEP 508
Author: Ofek Lev <ofekmeister@gmail.com>
Sponsor: Paul Ganssle <paul@ganssle.io>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/5018
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 20-Aug-2020
Post-History: 20-Aug-2020


Abstract
========

This PEP specifies how to write a project's dependencies in a
``pyproject.toml`` file for packaging-related tools to consume
using the `fields defined in PEP 621`_.

Entries
=======

All dependency entries MUST be valid `PEP 508 strings`_.

Build backends SHOULD abort at load time for any parsing errors.

::

    from packaging.requirements import InvalidRequirement, Requirement

    ...

    try:
        Requirement(entry)
    except InvalidRequirement:
        # exit

Specification
=============

dependencies
------------

- Format: array of strings or inline tables
- Related core metadata:

  - `Requires-Dist`_

Every element SHOULD be an `entry <#entries>`_.

::

    [project]
    dependencies = [
      'PyYAML ~= 5.0',
      'requests[security] < 3',
      'subprocess32; python_version < "3.2"',
    ]

Any element MAY be an inline table to support possible future functionality.
Backends MUST error when encountering these until the specification is extended.
Other parsers SHOULD do the same, though they MAY consider the entire enclosing
field as `dynamic`_.

optional-dependencies
---------------------

- Format: table
- Related core metadata:

  - `Provides-Extra`_
  - `Requires-Dist`_

Each key is the name of the provided option, with each value being the same type as
the `dependencies <#dependencies>`_ field i.e. an array of strings or inline tables.

::

    [project.optional-dependencies]
    tests = [
      'coverage>=5.0.3',
      'pytest',
      'pytest-benchmark[histogram]>=3.2.1',
    ]

Example
=======

This is a real-world example port of what `docker-compose`_ defines.

::

    [project]
    dependencies = [
      'cached-property >= 1.2.0, < 2',
      'distro >= 1.5.0, < 2',
      'docker[ssh] >= 4.2.2, < 5',
      'dockerpty >= 0.4.1, < 1',
      'docopt >= 0.6.1, < 1',
      'jsonschema >= 2.5.1, < 4',
      'PyYAML >= 3.10, < 6',
      'python-dotenv >= 0.13.0, < 1',
      'requests >= 2.20.0, < 3',
      'texttable >= 0.9.0, < 2',
      'websocket-client >= 0.32.0, < 1',

      # Conditional
      'backports.shutil_get_terminal_size == 1.0.0; python_version < "3.3"',
      'backports.ssl_match_hostname >= 3.5, < 4; python_version < "3.5"',
      'colorama >= 0.4, < 1; sys_platform == "win32"',
      'enum34 >= 1.0.4, < 2; python_version < "3.4"',
      'ipaddress >= 1.0.16, < 2; python_version < "3.3"',
      'subprocess32 >= 3.5.4, < 4; python_version < "3.2"',
    ]

    [project.optional-dependencies]
    socks = [ 'PySocks >= 1.5.6, != 1.5.7, < 2' ]
    tests = [
      'ddt >= 1.2.2, < 2',
      'pytest < 6',
      'mock >= 1.0.1, < 4; python_version < "3.4"',
    ]

Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.


.. _fields defined in PEP 621: https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0621/#dependencies-optional-dependencies
.. _PEP 508 strings: https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0508/
.. _Requires-Dist: https://packaging.python.org/specifications/core-metadata/#requires-dist-multiple-use
.. _dynamic: https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0621/#dynamic
.. _Provides-Extra: https://packaging.python.org/specifications/core-metadata/#provides-extra-multiple-use
.. _docker-compose: https://github.com/docker/compose/blob/789bfb0e8b2e61f15f423d371508b698c64b057f/setup.py#L28-L61

..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:

Commit message:

Correct backward compatible update logic

pep-0631.rst, after:

PEP: 631
Title: Dependency specification in pyproject.toml based on PEP 508
Author: Ofek Lev <ofekmeister@gmail.com>
Sponsor: Paul Ganssle <paul@ganssle.io>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/5018
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 20-Aug-2020
Post-History: 20-Aug-2020


Abstract
========

This PEP specifies how to write a project's dependencies in a
``pyproject.toml`` file for packaging-related tools to consume
using the `fields defined in PEP 621`_.

Entries
=======

All dependency entries MUST be valid `PEP 508 strings`_.

Build backends SHOULD abort at load time for any parsing errors.

::

    from packaging.requirements import InvalidRequirement, Requirement

    ...

    try:
        Requirement(entry)
    except InvalidRequirement:
        # exit

Specification
=============

dependencies
------------

- Format: array of strings or inline tables
- Related core metadata:

  - `Requires-Dist`_

Every element SHOULD be an `entry <#entries>`_.

::

    [project]
    dependencies = [
      'PyYAML ~= 5.0',
      'requests[security] < 3',
      'subprocess32; python_version < "3.2"',
    ]

Future versions of this specification that allow for any element to be an inline
table should be considered backwards compatible, and consumers of the ``[project]``
table should take this into consideration.

Backends MUST error when encountering these unless the specification is extended;
other parsers, particularly those not intended to be listed in a project's
``build-system.requires``, SHOULD consider the entire enclosing field as `dynamic`_.

optional-dependencies
---------------------

- Format: table
- Related core metadata:

  - `Provides-Extra`_
  - `Requires-Dist`_

Each key is the name of the provided option, with each value being the same type as
the `dependencies <#dependencies>`_ field i.e. an array of strings or inline tables.

::

    [project.optional-dependencies]
    tests = [
      'coverage>=5.0.3',
      'pytest',
      'pytest-benchmark[histogram]>=3.2.1',
    ]

Example
=======

This is a real-world example port of what `docker-compose`_ defines.

::

    [project]
    dependencies = [
      'cached-property >= 1.2.0, < 2',
      'distro >= 1.5.0, < 2',
      'docker[ssh] >= 4.2.2, < 5',
      'dockerpty >= 0.4.1, < 1',
      'docopt >= 0.6.1, < 1',
      'jsonschema >= 2.5.1, < 4',
      'PyYAML >= 3.10, < 6',
      'python-dotenv >= 0.13.0, < 1',
      'requests >= 2.20.0, < 3',
      'texttable >= 0.9.0, < 2',
      'websocket-client >= 0.32.0, < 1',

      # Conditional
      'backports.shutil_get_terminal_size == 1.0.0; python_version < "3.3"',
      'backports.ssl_match_hostname >= 3.5, < 4; python_version < "3.5"',
      'colorama >= 0.4, < 1; sys_platform == "win32"',
      'enum34 >= 1.0.4, < 2; python_version < "3.4"',
      'ipaddress >= 1.0.16, < 2; python_version < "3.3"',
      'subprocess32 >= 3.5.4, < 4; python_version < "3.2"',
    ]

    [project.optional-dependencies]
    socks = [ 'PySocks >= 1.5.6, != 1.5.7, < 2' ]
    tests = [
      'ddt >= 1.2.2, < 2',
      'pytest < 6',
      'mock >= 1.0.1, < 4; python_version < "3.4"',
    ]

Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.


.. _fields defined in PEP 621: https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0621/#dependencies-optional-dependencies
.. _PEP 508 strings: https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0508/
.. _Requires-Dist: https://packaging.python.org/specifications/core-metadata/#requires-dist-multiple-use
.. _dynamic: https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0621/#dynamic
.. _Provides-Extra: https://packaging.python.org/specifications/core-metadata/#provides-extra-multiple-use
.. _docker-compose: https://github.com/docker/compose/blob/789bfb0e8b2e61f15f423d371508b698c64b057f/setup.py#L28-L61

..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
