PEP: 8100
Title: January 2019 steering council election
Version: $Revision$
Last-Modified: $Date$
Author: Nathaniel J. Smith <njs@pobox.com>, Ernest W. Durbin III <ewdurbin@gmail.com>
Status: Active
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 3-Jan-2019


Abstract
========

This document describes the schedule and other details of the January
2019 election for the Python steering council, as specified in
PEP 13. This is the first steering council election.


Returns officer
===============

In future elections, the returns officer will be appointed by the
outgoing steering council. Since this is the first election, we have
no outgoing steering council, and PEP 13 says that the returns officer
is instead appointed by the PSF Executive Director, Ewa Jodlowska.
`She appointed Ernest W. Durbin III
<https://discuss.python.org/t/officially-appointing-the-returns-officer-for-the-steering-council-election/603>`__.


Schedule
========

There will be a two-week nomination period, followed by a two-week
vote.

The nomination period is: January 7, 2019 through January 20, 2019

The voting period is: January 21, 2019 12:00 UTC through Febuary 4, 2019 12:00
UTC (The end of February 3, 2019 `Anywhere on Earth
<http://www.ieee802.org/16/aoe.html>`_)


Candidates
==========

Candidates must be nominated by a core team member. If the candidate
is a core team member, they may nominate themselves.

Once the nomination period opens, candidates will be listed here:

1. `Brett Cannon <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-brett-cannon/620>`_ (``self``)


Voter Roll
==========

All active Python core team members are eligible to vote.

Ballots will be distributed based on the `The Python Voter Roll for this
election
<https://github.com/python/voters/blob/master/2019-01-21-2019-python-steering-committee-election-election.csv>`__.


Election Implementation
=======================

The election will be conducted using the `Helios Voting Service
<https://heliosvoting.org>`__.


Configuration
-------------

Short name: ``2019-python-steering-committee``

Name: ``2019 Python Steering Committee Election``

Description: ``Election for the Python steering council, as specified in PEP 13. This is the first steering council election.``

type: ``Election``

Use voter aliases: ``[X]``

Randomize answer order: ``[X]``

Private: ``[X]``

Help Email Address: ``ernest@python.org``

Voting starts at: ``January 21, 2019 12:00 UTC``

Voting ends at: ``February 4, 2019 12:00 UTC``

This will create an election in which:

* Voting is not open to the public, only those on the `Voter Roll`_ may
  participate. Ballots will be emailed when voting starts.
* Candidates are presented in random order, to help avoid bias.
* Voter identities and ballots are protected against cryptorgraphic advances.

Questions
---------

Question 1
~~~~~~~~~~

Select between ``0`` and ``5`` answers. Result Type: ``absolute``

Question: ``Select candidates for the Python Steering Council``

Answer #1 - #N: ``Candidates from Candidates_ Section``



Results
=======

There are no results yet, but when there are, they'll be listed here.


Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.



..
  Local Variables:
  mode: indented-text
  indent-tabs-mode: nil
  sentence-end-double-space: t
  fill-column: 70
  coding: utf-8
  End:
