PEP: 570
Title: Python Positional-Only Parameters
Version: $Revision$
Last-Modified: $Date$
Author: Larry Hastings <larry@hastings.org>,
        Pablo Galindo <pablogsal@gmail.com>,
        Mario Corchero <mariocj89@gmail.com>,
        Eric N. Vander Weele <ericvw@gmail.com>
BDFL-Delegate: Guido van Rossum <guido@python.org>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-570-python-positional-only-parameters/1078
Status: Accepted
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 20-Jan-2018
Python-Version: 3.8


========
Abstract
========

This PEP proposes to introduce a new syntax, ``/``, for specifying
positional-only parameters in Python function definitions.

Positional-only parameters have no externally-usable name. When a function
accepting positional-only parameters is called, positional arguments are mapped
to these parameters based solely on their order.

When designing APIs (application programming interfaces), library
authors try to ensure correct and intended usage of an API. Without the ability to
specify which parameters are positional-only, library authors must be careful
when choosing appropriate parameter names. This care must be taken
even for required parameters or when the parameters
have no external semantic meaning for callers of the API.

In this PEP, we discuss:

* Python's history and current semantics for positional-only parameters
* the problems encountered by not having them
* how these problems are handled without language-intrinsic support for
  positional-only parameters
* the benefits of having positional-only parameters

Within context of the motivation, we then:

* discuss why positional-only parameters should be a feature intrinsic to the
  language
* propose the syntax for marking positional-only parameters
* present how to teach this new feature
* note rejected ideas in further detail

==========
Motivation
==========

--------------------------------------------------------
History of Positional-Only Parameter Semantics in Python
--------------------------------------------------------

Python originally supported positional-only parameters. Early versions of the
language lacked the ability to call functions with arguments bound to parameters
by name. Around Python 1.0, parameter semantics changed to be
positional-or-keyword.  Since then, users have been able to provide arguments
to a function either positionally or by the keyword name specified in the
function's definition.

In current versions of Python, many CPython "builtin" and standard library
functions only accept positional-only parameters. The resulting semantics can be
easily observed by calling one of these functions using keyword arguments::

    >>> help(pow)
    ...
    pow(x, y, z=None, /)
    ...

    >>> pow(x=5, y=3)
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
    TypeError: pow() takes no keyword arguments

``pow()`` expresses that its parameters are positional-only via the
``/`` marker. However, this is only a documentation convention; Python
developers cannot use this syntax in code.

There are functions with other interesting semantics:

* ``range()``, an overloaded function, accepts an optional parameter to the
  *left* of its required parameter. [#RANGE]_

* ``dict()``, whose mapping/iterator parameter is optional and semantically
  must be positional-only. Any externally visible name for this parameter
  would occlude that name going into the ``**kwarg`` keyword variadic parameter
  dict. [#DICT]_

One can emulate these semantics in Python code by accepting
``(*args, **kwargs)`` and parsing the arguments manually. However, this results
in a disconnect between the function definition and what the function
contractually accepts. The function definition does not match the logic of the
argument handling.

Additionally, the ``/`` syntax is used beyond CPython for specifying similar
semantics (i.e., [#numpy-ufuncs]_ [#scipy-gammaln]_); thus, indicating that
these scenarios are not exclusive to CPython and the standard library.

-------------------------------------------
Problems Without Positional-Only Parameters
-------------------------------------------

Without positional-only parameters, there are challenges for library authors
and users of APIs. The following subsections outline the problems
encountered by each entity.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Challenges for Library Authors
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

With positional-or-keyword parameters, the mix of calling conventions is not
always desirable. Authors may want to restrict usage of an API by disallowing
calling the API with keyword arguments, which exposes the name of the parameter when
part of the public API. This approach is especially useful for required function
parameters that already have semantic meaning (e.g,
``namedtuple(typenames, field_names, …)`` or when the parameter name has no
true external meaning (e.g., ``arg1``, ``arg2``, …, etc for ``min()``). If a
caller of an API starts using a keyword argument, the library author cannot rename
the parameter because it would be a breaking change.

Positional-only parameters can be emulated by extracting arguments from
``*args`` one by one. However, this approach is error-prone and is not
synonymous with the function definition, as previously mentioned. The usage of
the function is ambiguous and forces users to look at ``help()``, the
associated auto-generated documentation, or source code to understand what
parameters the function contractually accepts.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Challenges for Users of an API
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Users may be surprised when first encountering positional-only notation. This
is expected given that it has only recently been documented
[#document-positional-only]_ and it is not possible to use in Python code. For
these reasons, this notation is currently an outlier that appears only in
CPython APIs developed in C. Documenting the notation and making it possible
to use it in Python code would eliminate this disconnect.

Furthermore, the current documentation for positional-only parameters is inconsistent:

* Some functions denote optional groups of positional-only parameters by
  enclosing them in nested square brackets. [#BORDER]_

* Some functions denote optional groups of positional-only parameters by
  presenting multiple prototypes with varying numbers of parameters.
  [#SENDFILE]_

* Some functions use *both* of the above approaches. [#RANGE]_ [#ADDCH]_

Another point the current documentation does not distinguish is
whether a function takes positional-only parameters. ``open()`` accepts keyword
arguments; however, ``ord()`` does not — there is no way of telling just by
reading the existing documentation.

--------------------------------------
Benefits of Positional-Only Parameters
--------------------------------------

Positional-only parameters give more control to library authors to better
express the intended usage of an API and allows the API to evolve in a safe,
backward-compatible way. Additionally, it makes the Python language more
consistent with existing documentation and the behavior of various
"builtin" and standard library functions.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Empowering Library Authors
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Library authors would have the flexibility to change the name of
positional-only parameters without breaking callers. This flexibility reduces the
cognitive burden for choosing an appropriate public-facing name for required
parameters or parameters that have no true external semantic meaning.

Positional-only parameters are useful in several situations such as:

* when a function accepts any keyword argument but also can accept a positional one
* when a parameter has no external semantic meaning
* when an API's parameters are required and unambiguous

A key
scenario is when a function accepts any keyword argument but can also accepts a
positional one. Prominent examples are ``Formatter.format`` and
``dict.update``. For instance, ``dict.update`` accepts a dictionary
(positionally), an iterable of key/value pairs (positionally), or multiple
keyword arguments. In this scenario, if the dictionary parameter were not
positional-only, the user could not use the name that the function definition
uses for the parameter or, conversely, the function could not distinguish
easily if the argument received is the dictionary/iterable or a keyword
argument for updating the key/value pair.

Another scenario where positional-only parameters are useful is when the
parameter name has no true external semantic meaning. For example, let's say
we want to create a function that converts from one type to another::

    def as_my_type(x):
        ...

The name of the parameter provides no intrinsic value and forces the API author
to maintain its name forever since callers might pass ``x`` as a keyword
argument.

Additionally, positional-only parameters are useful when an API's parameters
are required and is unambiguous with respect to function. For example::

    def add_to_queue(item: QueueItem):
        ...

The name of the function makes clear the argument expected. A keyword
argument provides minimal benefit and also limits the future evolution of the
API. Say at a later time we want this function to be able to take multiple
items, while preserving backwards compatibility::

    def add_to_queue(items: Union[QueueItem, List[QueueItem]]):
        ...

or to take them by using argument lists::

    def add_to_queue(*items: QueueItem):
        ...

the author would be forced to always keep the original parameter name to avoid
potentially breaking callers.

By being able to specify positional-only parameters, an author can change the
name of the parameters freely or even change them to ``*args``, as seen in the
previous example. There are multiple function definitions in the standard
library which fall into this category. For example, the required parameter to
``collections.defaultdict`` (called *default_factory* in its documentation) can
only be passed positionally. One special case of this situation is the *self*
parameter for class methods: it is undesirable that a caller can bind by
keyword to the name ``self`` when calling the method from the class::

    io.FileIO.write(self=f, b=b"data")

Indeed, function definitions from the standard library implemented in C usually
take ``self`` as a positional-only parameter::

    >>> help(io.FileIO.write)
    Help on method_descriptor:

    write(self, b, /)
        Write buffer b to file, return number of bytes written.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Improving Language Consistency
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Python language would be more consistent with positional-only
parameters. If the concept is a normal feature of Python rather than a feature
exclusive to extension modules, it would reduce confusion for users
encountering functions with positional-only parameters. Some major
third-party packages are already using the ``/`` notation in their function
definitions [#numpy-ufuncs]_ [#scipy-gammaln]_.

Bridging the gap found between "builtin" functions which
specify positional-only parameters and pure Python implementations that lack
the positional syntax would improve consistency. The ``/`` syntax is already exposed
in the existing documentation such as when builtins and interfaces are generated
by the argument clinic.

Another essential aspect to consider is PEP 399, which mandates that
pure Python versions of modules in the standard library *must* have the same
interface and semantics that the accelerator modules implemented in C. For
example, if ``collections.defaultdict`` were to have a pure Python
implementation it would need to make use of positional-only parameters to match
the interface of its C counterpart.

=========
Rationale
=========

We propose to introduce positional-only parameters as a new syntax to the
Python language.

The new syntax will enable library authors to further control how their API
can be called. It will allow designating which parameters must be called as
positional-only, while preventing them from being called as keyword arguments.

Previously, (informational) PEP 457 defined the syntax, but with a much more vague
scope. This PEP takes the original proposal a step further by justifying
the syntax and providing an implementation for the ``/`` syntax in function
definitions.

-----------
Performance
-----------

In addition to the aforementioned benefits, the parsing and handling of
positional-only arguments is faster. This performance benefit can be
demonstrated in this thread about converting keyword arguments to positional:
[#thread-keyword-to-positional]_. Due to this speedup, there has been a recent
trend towards moving builtins away from keyword arguments: recently,
backwards-incompatible changes were made to disallow keyword arguments to
``bool``, ``float``, ``list``, ``int``, ``tuple``.

---------------
Maintainability
---------------

Providing a way to specify positional-only parameters in Python will make it
easier to maintain pure Python implementations of C modules. Additionally,
library authors defining functions will have the choice for choosing
positional-only parameters if they determine that passing a keyword argument
provides no additional clarity.

This is a well discussed, recurring topic on the Python mailing lists:

* September 2018: `Anders Hovmöller: [Python-ideas] Positional-only
  parameters
  <https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-ideas/2018-September/053233.html>`_
* February 2017: `Victor Stinner: [Python-ideas] Positional-only
  parameters
  <https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-ideas/2017-February/044879.html>`_,
  `discussion continued in March
  <https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-ideas/2017-March/044956.html>`_
* February 2017: [#python-ideas-decorator-based]_
* March 2012: [#GUIDO]_
* May 2007: `George Sakkis: [Python-ideas] Positional only arguments
  <https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-ideas/2007-May/000704.html>`_
* May 2006: `Benji York: [Python-Dev] Positional-only Arguments
  <https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2006-May/064790.html>`_

----------------
Logical ordering
----------------

Positional-only parameters also have the (minor) benefit of enforcing some
logical order when calling interfaces that make use of them. For example, the
``range`` function takes all its parameters positionally and disallows forms
like::

    range(stop=5, start=0, step=2)
    range(stop=5, step=2, start=0)
    range(step=2, start=0, stop=5)
    range(step=2, stop=5, start=0)

at the price of disallowing the use of keyword arguments for the (unique)
intended order::

    range(start=0, stop=5, step=2)

-------------------------------------------
Compatibility for Pure Python and C Modules
-------------------------------------------

Another critical motivation for positional-only parameters is PEP 399:
Pure Python/C Accelerator Module Compatibility Requirements. This
PEP states that:

    This PEP requires that in these instances that the C code must pass the
    test suite used for the pure Python code to act as much as a drop-in
    replacement as reasonably possible

If the C code is implemented using the existing capabilities
to implement positional-only parameters using the argument clinic, and related
machinery, it is not possible for the pure Python counterpart to match the
provided interface and requirements. This creates a disparity between the
interfaces of some functions and classes in the CPython standard library and
other Python implementations. For example::

    $ python3 # CPython 3.7.2
    >>> import binascii; binascii.crc32(data=b'data')
    TypeError: crc32() takes no keyword arguments

    $ pypy3 # PyPy 6.0.0
    >>>> import binascii; binascii.crc32(data=b'data')
    2918445923

Other Python implementations can reproduce the CPython APIs manually, but this
goes against the spirit of PEP 399 to avoid duplication of effort by
mandating that all modules added to Python's standard library **must** have a
pure Python implementation with the same interface and semantics.

-------------------------
Consistency in Subclasses
-------------------------

Another scenario where positional-only parameters provide benefit occurs when a
subclass overrides a method of the base class and changes the name of parameters
that are intended to be positional::

    class Base:
        def meth(self, arg: int) -> str:
            ...

    class Sub(Base):
        def meth(self, other_arg: int) -> str:
            ...

    def func(x: Base):
        x.meth(arg=12)

    func(Sub())  # Runtime error

This situation could be considered a Liskov violation — the subclass cannot be
used in a context when an instance of the base class is expected. Renaming
arguments when overloading methods can happen when the subclass has reasons to
use a different choice for the parameter name that is more appropriate for the
specific domain of the subclass (e.g., when subclassing ``Mapping`` to
implement a DNS lookup cache, the derived class may not want to use the generic
argument names ‘key’ and ‘value’ but rather ‘host’ and ‘address’). Having this
function definition with positional-only parameters can avoid this problem
because users will not be able to call the interface using keyword arguments.
In general, designing for subclassing usually involves anticipating code that
hasn't been written yet and over which the author has no control. Having
measures that can facilitate the evolution of interfaces in a
backwards-compatible would be useful for library authors.

-------------
Optimizations
-------------

A final argument in favor of positional-only parameters is that they allow some
new optimizations like the ones already present in the argument clinic due to
the fact that parameters are expected to be passed in strict order. For example, CPython's
internal ``METH_FASTCALL`` calling convention has been recently specialized for
functions with positional-only parameters to eliminate the cost for handling
empty keywords. Similar performance improvements can be applied when creating
the evaluation frame of Python functions thanks to positional-only parameters.

=============
Specification
=============

--------------------
Syntax and Semantics
--------------------

From the "ten-thousand foot view", eliding ``*args`` and ``**kwargs`` for
illustration, the grammar for a function definition would look like::

    def name(positional_or_keyword_parameters, *, keyword_only_parameters):

Building on that example, the new syntax for function definitions would look
like::

    def name(positional_only_parameters, /, positional_or_keyword_parameters,
             *, keyword_only_parameters):

The following would apply:

* All parameters left of the ``/`` are treated as positional-only.
* If ``/`` is not specified in the function definition, that function does not
  accept any positional-only arguments.
* The logic around optional values for positional-only parameters remains the
  same as for positional-or-keyword parameters.
* Once a positional-only parameter is specified with a default, the
  following positional-only and positional-or-keyword parameters need to have
  defaults as well.
* Positional-only parameters which do not have default
  values are *required* positional-only parameters.

Therefore the following would be valid function definitions::

    def name(p1, p2, /, p_or_kw, *, kw):
    def name(p1, p2=None, /, p_or_kw=None, *, kw):
    def name(p1, p2=None, /, *, kw):
    def name(p1, p2=None, /):
    def name(p1, p2, /, p_or_kw):
    def name(p1, p2, /):

Just like today, the following would be valid function definitions::

    def name(p_or_kw, *, kw):
    def name(*, kw):

While the following would be invalid::

    def name(p1, p2=None, /, p_or_kw, *, kw):
    def name(p1=None, p2, /, p_or_kw=None, *, kw):
    def name(p1=None, p2, /):

--------------------------
Full Grammar Specification
--------------------------

A simplified view of the proposed grammar specification is::

    typedargslist:
      tfpdef ['=' test] (',' tfpdef ['=' test])* ',' '/' [','  # and so on

    varargslist:
      vfpdef ['=' test] (',' vfpdef ['=' test])* ',' '/' [','  # and so on

Based on the reference implementation in this PEP, the new rule for
``typedarglist`` would be::

    typedargslist: (tfpdef ['=' test] (',' tfpdef ['=' test])* ',' '/' [',' [tfpdef ['=' test] (',' tfpdef ['=' test])* [',' [
            '*' [tfpdef] (',' tfpdef ['=' test])* [',' ['**' tfpdef [',']]]
          | '**' tfpdef [',']]]
      | '*' [tfpdef] (',' tfpdef ['=' test])* [',' ['**' tfpdef [',']]]
      | '**' tfpdef [',']] ] )| (
       tfpdef ['=' test] (',' tfpdef ['=' test])* [',' [
            '*' [tfpdef] (',' tfpdef ['=' test])* [',' ['**' tfpdef [',']]]
          | '**' tfpdef [',']]]
     | '*' [tfpdef] (',' tfpdef ['=' test])* [',' ['**' tfpdef [',']]]
     | '**' tfpdef [','])

and for ``varargslist`` would be::

    varargslist: vfpdef ['=' test ](',' vfpdef ['=' test])* ',' '/' [',' [ (vfpdef ['=' test] (',' vfpdef ['=' test])* [',' [
            '*' [vfpdef] (',' vfpdef ['=' test])* [',' ['**' vfpdef [',']]]
          | '**' vfpdef [',']]]
      | '*' [vfpdef] (',' vfpdef ['=' test])* [',' ['**' vfpdef [',']]]
      | '**' vfpdef [',']) ]] | (vfpdef ['=' test] (',' vfpdef ['=' test])* [',' [
            '*' [vfpdef] (',' vfpdef ['=' test])* [',' ['**' vfpdef [',']]]
          | '**' vfpdef [',']]]
      | '*' [vfpdef] (',' vfpdef ['=' test])* [',' ['**' vfpdef [',']]]
      | '**' vfpdef [',']
    )

--------------------
Semantic Corner Case
--------------------

The following is an interesting corollary of the specification.
Consider this function definition::

    def foo(name, **kwds):
        return 'name' in kwds

There is no possible call that will make it return ``True``.
For example::

    >>> foo(1, **{'name': 2})
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
    TypeError: foo() got multiple values for argument 'name'
    >>>

But using ``/`` we can support this::

    def foo(name, /, **kwds):
        return 'name' in kwds

Now the above call will return ``True``.

In other words, the names of positional-only parameters can be used in
``**kwds`` without ambiguity.  (As another example, this benefits the
signatures of ``dict()`` and ``dict.update()``.)

----------------------------
Origin of "/" as a Separator
----------------------------

Using ``/`` as a separator was initially proposed by Guido van Rossum
in 2012 [#GUIDO]_ :

    Alternative proposal: how about using '/' ? It's kind of the opposite
    of '*' which means "keyword argument", and '/' is not a new character.

=================
How To Teach This
=================

Introducing a dedicated syntax to mark positional-only parameters is closely
analogous to existing keyword-only arguments. Teaching these concepts together
may *simplify* how to teach the possible function definitions a user may encounter or
design.

This PEP recommends adding a new subsection to the Python documentation, in the
section `"More on Defining Functions"`_, where the rest of the argument types
are discussed. The following paragraphs serve as a draft for these additions.
They will introduce the notation for both positional-only and
keyword-only parameters. It is not intended to be exhaustive, nor should it be
considered the final version to be incorporated into the documentation.


.. _"More on Defining Functions": https://docs.python.org/3.7/tutorial/controlflow.html#more-on-defining-functions

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

By default, arguments may be passed to a Python function either by position
or explicitly by keyword. For readability and performance, it makes sense to
restrict the way arguments can be passed so that a developer need only look
at the function definition to determine if items are passed by position, by
position or keyword, or by keyword.

A function definition may look like::

   def f(pos1, pos2, /, pos_or_kwd, *, kwd1, kwd2):
         -----------    ----------     ----------
           |             |                  |
           |        Positional or keyword   |
           |                                - Keyword only
            -- Positional only

where ``/`` and ``*`` are optional. If used, these symbols indicate the kind of
parameter by how the arguments may be passed to the function:
positional-only, positional-or-keyword, and keyword-only. Keyword parameters
are also referred to as named parameters.

-------------------------------
Positional-or-Keyword Arguments
-------------------------------

If ``/`` and ``*`` are not present in the function definition, arguments may
be passed to a function by position or by keyword.

--------------------------
Positional-Only Parameters
--------------------------

Looking at this in a bit more detail, it is possible to mark certain parameters
as *positional-only*. If *positional-only*, the parameters' order matters, and
the parameters cannot be passed by keyword. Positional-only parameters would
be placed before a ``/`` (forward-slash). The ``/`` is used to logically
separate the positional-only parameters from the rest of the parameters.
If there is no ``/`` in the function definition, there are no positional-only
parameters.

Parameters following the ``/`` may be *positional-or-keyword* or *keyword-only*.

----------------------
Keyword-Only Arguments
----------------------

To mark parameters as *keyword-only*, indicating the parameters must be passed
by keyword argument, place an ``*`` in the arguments list just before the first
*keyword-only* parameter.

-----------------
Function Examples
-----------------

Consider the following example function definitions paying close attention to the
markers ``/`` and ``*``::

   >>> def standard_arg(arg):
   ...     print(arg)
   ...
   >>> def pos_only_arg(arg, /):
   ...     print(arg)
   ...
   >>> def kwd_only_arg(*, arg):
   ...     print(arg)
   ...
   >>> def combined_example(pos_only, /, standard, *, kwd_only):
   ...     print(pos_only, standard, kwd_only)


The first function definition ``standard_arg``, the most familiar form,
places no restrictions on the calling convention and arguments may be
passed by position or keyword::

   >>> standard_arg(2)
   2

   >>> standard_arg(arg=2)
   2

The second function ``pos_only_arg` is restricted to only use positional
parameters as there is a ``/`` in the function definition::

   >>> pos_only_arg(1)
   1

   >>> pos_only_arg(arg=1)
   Traceback (most recent call last):
     File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
   TypeError: pos_only_arg() got an unexpected keyword argument 'arg'

The third function ``kwd_only_args`` only allows keyword arguments as indicated
by a ``*`` in the function definition::

   >>> kwd_only_arg(3)
   Traceback (most recent call last):
     File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
   TypeError: kwd_only_arg() takes 0 positional arguments but 1 was given

   >>> kwd_only_arg(arg=3)
   3

And the last uses all three calling conventions in the same function
definition::

   >>> combined_example(1, 2, 3)
   Traceback (most recent call last):
     File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
   TypeError: combined_example() takes 2 positional arguments but 3 were given

   >>> combined_example(1, 2, kwd_only=3)
   1 2 3

   >>> combined_example(1, standard=2, kwd_only=3)
   1 2 3

   >>> combined_example(pos_only=1, standard=2, kwd_only=3)
   Traceback (most recent call last):
     File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
   TypeError: combined_example() got an unexpected keyword argument 'pos_only'

-----
Recap
-----

The use case will determine which parameters to use in the function definition::

   def f(pos1, pos2, /, pos_or_kwd, *, kwd1, kwd2):

As guidance:

* Use positional-only if names do not matter or have no meaning, and there are
  only a few arguments which will always be passed in the same order.
* Use keyword-only when names have meaning and the function definition is
  more understandable by being explicit with names.

========================
Reference Implementation
========================

An initial implementation that passes the CPython test suite is available for
evaluation [#posonly-impl]_.

The benefits of this implementations are speed of handling positional-only
parameters, consistency with the implementation of keyword-only parameters (PEP
3102), and a simpler implementation of all the tools and modules that would be
impacted by this change.

==============
Rejected Ideas
==============

----------
Do Nothing
----------

Always an option — the status quo. While this was considered, the
aforementioned benefits are worth the addition to the language.

----------
Decorators
----------

It has been suggested on python-ideas [#python-ideas-decorator-based]_ to
provide a decorator written in Python for this feature.

This approach has the benefit of not polluting function definition with
additional syntax. However, we have decided to reject this idea because:

* It introduces an asymmetry with how parameter behavior is declared.

* It makes it difficult for static analyzers and type checkers to
  safely identify positional-only parameters.  They would need to query the AST
  for the list of decorators and identify the correct one by name or with extra
  heuristics, while keyword-only parameters are exposed
  directly in the AST.  In order for tools to correctly identify
  positional-only parameters, they would need to execute the module to access
  any metadata the decorator is setting.

* Any error with the declaration will be reported only at runtime.

* It may be more difficult to identify positional-only parameters in long
  function definitions, as it forces the user to count them to know which is
  the last one that is impacted by the decorator.

* The ``/`` syntax has already been introduced for C functions. This
  inconsistency will make it more challenging to implement any tools and
  modules that deal with this syntax — including but not limited to, the
  argument clinic, the inspect module and the ``ast`` module.

* The decorator implementation would likely impose a runtime performance cost,
  particularly when compared to adding support directly to the interpreter.


-------------------
Per-Argument Marker
-------------------

A per-argument marker is another language-intrinsic option. The approach adds
a token to each of the parameters to indicate they are positional-only and
requires those parameters to be placed together. Example::

  def (.arg1, .arg2, arg3):

Note the dot (i.e., ``.``) on ``.arg1`` and ``.arg2``. While this approach
may be easier to read, it has been rejected because ``/`` as an explicit marker
is congruent with ``*`` for keyword-only arguments and is less error-prone.

It should be noted that some libraries already use leading underscore
[#leading-underscore]_ to conventionally indicate parameters as positional-only.

-----------------------------------
Using "__" as a Per-Argument Marker
-----------------------------------

Some libraries and applications (like ``mypy`` or ``jinja``) use names
prepended with a double underscore (i.e., ``__``) as a convention to indicate
positional-only parameters. We have rejected the idea of introducing ``__`` as
a new syntax because:

* It is a backwards-incompatible change.

* It is not symmetric with how the keyword-only parameters are currently
  declared.

* Querying the AST for positional-only parameters would require checking the
  normal arguments and inspecting their names, whereas keyword-only parameters
  have a property associated with them (``FunctionDef.args.kwonlyargs``).

* Every parameter would need to be inspected to know when positional-only
  arguments end.

* The marker is more verbose, forcing marking every positional-only parameter.

* It clashes with other uses of the double underscore prefix like invoking name
  mangling in classes.


-------------------------------------------------
Group Positional-Only Parameters With Parentheses
-------------------------------------------------

Tuple parameter unpacking is a Python 2 feature which allows the use of a tuple
as a parameter in a function definition. It allows a sequence argument to be
unpacked automatically. An example is::

    def fxn(a, (b, c), d):
        pass

Tuple argument unpacking was removed in Python 3 (PEP 3113). There has been a
proposition to reuse this syntax to implement positional-only parameters. We
have rejected this syntax for indicating positional only parameters for several
reasons:

* The syntax is asymmetric with respect to how keyword-only parameters are
  declared.

* Python 2 uses this syntax which could raise confusion regarding the behavior
  of this syntax. This would be surprising to users porting Python 2 codebases
  that were using this feature.

* This syntax is very similar to tuple literals. This can raise additional
  confusion because it can be confused with a tuple declaration.

------------------------
After Separator Proposal
------------------------

Marking positional-parameters after the ``/`` was another idea considered.
However, we were unable to find an approach which would modify the arguments
after the marker. Otherwise, would force the parameters before the marker to
be positional-only as well. For example::

  def (x, y, /, z):

If we define that ``/`` marks ``z`` as positional-only, it would not be
possible to specify ``x`` and ``y`` as keyword arguments. Finding a way to
work around this limitation would add confusion given that at the moment
keyword arguments cannot be followed by positional arguments. Therefore, ``/``
would make both the preceding and following parameters positional-only.

======
Thanks
======

Credit for some of the content of this PEP is contained in Larry Hastings’s
PEP 457.

Credit for the use of ``/`` as the separator between positional-only and
positional-or-keyword parameters go to Guido van Rossum, in a proposal from
2012. [#GUIDO]_

Credit for discussion about the simplification of the grammar goes to
Braulio Valdivieso.


.. [#numpy-ufuncs]
   https://docs.scipy.org/doc/numpy/reference/ufuncs.html#available-ufuncs

.. [#scipy-gammaln]
   https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.special.gammaln.html

.. [#DICT]
    http://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#dict

.. [#RANGE]
    http://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html#func-range

.. [#BORDER]
    http://docs.python.org/3/library/curses.html#curses.window.border

.. [#SENDFILE]
    http://docs.python.org/3/library/os.html#os.sendfile

.. [#ADDCH]
    http://docs.python.org/3/library/curses.html#curses.window.addch

.. [#GUIDO]
   Guido van Rossum, posting to python-ideas, March 2012:
   https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-ideas/2012-March/014364.html
   and
   https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-ideas/2012-March/014378.html
   and
   https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-ideas/2012-March/014417.html

.. [#PEP399]
   https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0399/

.. [#python-ideas-decorator-based]
   https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-ideas/2017-February/044888.html

.. [#posonly-impl]
   https://github.com/pablogsal/cpython_positional_only

.. [#thread-keyword-to-positional]
   https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-ideas/2016-January/037874.html

.. [#leading-underscore]
   https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-ideas/2018-September/053319.html

.. [#document-positional-only]
   https://bugs.python.org/issue21314

=========
Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.
