pep-0616.rst, before:

PEP: 616
Title: String methods to remove prefixes and suffixes
Author: Dennis Sweeney <sweeney.dennis650@gmail.com>
Sponsor: Eric V. Smith <eric@trueblade.com>
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 19-Mar-2020
Python-Version: 3.9
Post-History: 20-Mar-2020


Abstract
========

This is a proposal to add two new methods, ``cutprefix`` and
``cutsuffix``, to the APIs of Python's various string objects.  These
methods would remove a prefix or suffix (respectively) from a string,
if present, and would be added to to Unicode ``str`` objects, binary
``bytes`` and ``bytearray`` objects, and ``collections.UserString``.


Rationale
=========

There have been repeated issues on Python-Ideas [#pyid]_ [3]_,
Python-Dev [4]_ [5]_ [6]_ [7]_, the Bug Tracker, and
StackOverflow [#confusion]_, related to user confusion about the
existing ``str.lstrip`` and ``str.rstrip`` methods.  These users are
typically expecting the behavior of ``cutprefix`` and ``cutsuffix``,
but they are surprised that the parameter for ``lstrip`` is
interpreted as a set of characters, not a substring.  This repeated
issue is evidence that these methods are useful.  The new methods
allow a cleaner redirection of users to the desired behavior.

As another testimonial for the usefulness of these methods, several
users on Python-Ideas [#pyid]_ reported frequently including similar
functions in their own code for productivity.  The implementation
often contained subtle mistakes regarding the handling of the empty
string (see `Specification`_).


Specification
=============

The builtin ``str`` class will gain two new methods with roughly the
following behavior::

    def cutprefix(self, prefix, /):
        if not isinstance(self, str):
            raise TypeError()
        self_str = str(self)

        if isinstance(prefix, tuple):
            for option in prefix:
                if not isinstance(option, str):
                    raise TypeError()
                option_str = str(option)

                if self_str.startswith(option_str):
                    return self_str[len(option_str):]

            return self_str[:]

        if not isinstance(prefix, str):
            raise TypeError()

        prefix_str = str(prefix)

        if self_str.startswith(prefix_str):
            return self_str[len(prefix_str):]
        else:
            return self_str[:]


    def cutsuffix(self, suffix, /):
        if not isinstance(self, str):
            raise TypeError()
        self_str = str(self)

        if isinstance(suffix, tuple):
            for option in suffix:
                if not isinstance(option, str):
                    raise TypeError()
                option_str = str(option)

                if option_str and self_str.endswith(option_str):
                    return self_str[:-len(option_str)]

            return self_str[:]

        if not isinstance(suffix, str):
            raise TypeError()
        suffix_str = str(suffix)

        if suffix_str and self_str.startswith(suffix_str):
            return self_str[:-len(suffix_str)]
        else:
            return self_str[:]

Note that without the check for the truthyness of suffixes, 
``s.cutsuffix('')`` would be mishandled and always return the empty 
string due to the unintended evaluation of ``self[:-0]``.

Methods with the corresponding semantics will be added to the builtin 
``bytes`` and ``bytearray`` objects.  If ``b`` is either a ``bytes``
or ``bytearray`` object, then ``b.cutsuffix()`` and ``b.cutprefix()``
will accept any bytes-like object or tuple of bytes-like objects as an
argument.  The one-at-a-time checking of types matches the implementation
of ``startswith()`` and ``endswith()`` methods.

The ``self_str[:]`` copying behavior in the code ensures that the 
``bytearray`` methods do not return ``self``, but it does not preclude
the ``str`` and ``bytes`` methods from returning ``self``.  Because
``str`` and ``bytes`` instances are immutable, the  ``cutprefix()``
and ``cutsuffix()`` methods on these objects may (but are not
required to) make the optimization of returning ``self`` if 
``type(self) is str`` (``type(self) is bytes`` respectively)
and the given affixes are not found, or are empty.  As such, the
following behavior is considered a CPython implementation detail, and
is not guaranteed by this specification::

    >>> x = 'foobar' * 10**6
    >>> x.cutprefix('baz') is x is x.cutsuffix('baz')
    True
    >>> x.cutprefix('') is x is x.cutsuffix('')
    True

To test whether any affixes were removed during the call, users
should use the constant-time behavior of comparing the lengths of
the original and new strings::

    >>> string = 'Python String Input'
    >>> new_string = string.cutprefix("Py")
    >>> modified = (len(string) != len(new_string))
    >>> modified
    True

Users may also continue using ``startswith()`` and ``endswith()``
methods for control flow instead of testing the lengths as above.

The two methods will also be added to ``collections.UserString``, with
similar behavior.

Motivating examples from the Python standard library
====================================================

The examples below demonstrate how the proposed methods can make code
one or more of the following:

1. Less fragile:
    
   The code will not depend on the user to count the length of a literal.

2. More performant:
    
   The code does not require a call to the Python built-in ``len``
   function, nor to the more expensive ``str.replace()``
   method.

3. More descriptive:
    
   The methods give a higher-level API for code readability, as
   opposed to the traditional method of string slicing.


find_recursionlimit.py
----------------------

- Current::

    if test_func_name.startswith("test_"):
        print(test_func_name[5:])
    else:
        print(test_func_name)

- Improved::

    print(test_func_name.cutprefix("test_"))


deccheck.py
-----------

This is an interesting case because the author chose to use the
``str.replace`` method in a situation where only a prefix was
intended to be removed.

- Current::

    if funcname.startswith("context."):
        self.funcname = funcname.replace("context.", "")
        self.contextfunc = True
    else:
        self.funcname = funcname
        self.contextfunc = False

- Improved::

    if funcname.startswith("context."):
        self.funcname = funcname.cutprefix("context.")
        self.contextfunc = True
    else:
        self.funcname = funcname
        self.contextfunc = False

- Arguably further improved::

    self.contextfunc = funcname.startswith("context.")
    self.funcname = funcname.cutprefix("context.")


cookiejar.py
------------

- Current::

    def strip_quotes(text):
        if text.startswith('"'):
            text = text[1:]
        if text.endswith('"'):
            text = text[:-1]
        return text

- Improved::

    def strip_quotes(text):
        return text.cutprefix('"').cutsuffix('"')


test_concurrent_futures.py
--------------------------

In the following example, the meaning of the code changes slightly,
but in context, it behaves the same.

- Current::

    if name.endswith(('Mixin', 'Tests')):
        return name[:-5]
    elif name.endswith('Test'):
        return name[:-4]
    else:
        return name

- Improved::

    return name.cutsuffix(('Mixin', 'Tests', 'Test'))


There were many other such examples in the stdlib.


Rejected Ideas
==============

Expand the lstrip and rstrip APIs
---------------------------------

Because ``lstrip`` takes a string as its argument, it could be viewed
as taking an iterable of length-1 strings.  The API could therefore be 
generalized to accept any iterable of strings, which would be 
successively removed as prefixes.  While this behavior would be 
consistent, it would not be obvious for users to have to call 
``'foobar'.cutprefix(('foo,))`` for the common use case of a 
single prefix.

Remove multiple copies of a prefix
----------------------------------

This is the behavior that would be consistent with the aforementioned
expansion of the ``lstrip``/``rstrip`` API -- repeatedly applying the
function until the argument is unchanged.  This behavior is attainable
from the proposed behavior via by the following::
    
    >>> s = 'foobar' * 100 + 'bar'
    >>> prefixes = ('bar', 'foo')
    >>> while len(s) != len(s := s.cutprefix(prefixes)): pass
    >>> s
    'bar'

or the more obvious and readable alternative::

    >>> s = 'foo' * 100 + 'bar'
    >>> prefixes = ('bar', 'foo')
    >>> while s.startswith(prefixes): s = s.cutprefix(prefixes)
    >>> s
    'bar'


Raising an exception when not found
-----------------------------------

There was a suggestion that ``s.cutprefix(pre)`` should raise an
exception if ``not s.startswith(pre)``.  However, this does not match
with the behavior and feel of other string methods.  There could be
``required=False`` keyword added, but this violates the KISS
principle.


Alternative Method Names
------------------------

Several alternatives method names have been proposed.  Some are listed
below, along with commentary for why they should be rejected in favor
of ``cutprefix`` (the same arguments hold for ``cutsuffix``).

- ``ltrim``, ``trimprefix``, etc.:

  "Trim" does in other languages (e.g. JavaScript, Java, Go, PHP)
  what ``strip`` methods do in Python.

- ``lstrip(string=...)``

  This would avoid adding a new method, but for different 
  behavior, it's better to have two different methods than one
  method with a keyword argument that select the behavior.

- ``cut_prefix``:

  All of the other methods of the string API, e.g.
  ``str.startswith()``, use ``lowercase`` rather than
  ``lower_case_with_underscores``.

- ``cutleft``, ``leftcut``, or ``lcut``:

  The explicitness of "prefix" is preferred.

- ``removeprefix``, ``deleteprefix``, ``withoutprefix``, ``dropprefix``, etc.:

  All of these might have been acceptable, but they have more
  characters than ``cut``.  Some suggested that the verb "cut"
  implies mutability, but the string API already contains verbs
  like "replace", "strip", "split", and "swapcase".

- ``stripprefix``:

  Users may benefit from remembering that "strip" means working
  with sets of characters, while other methods work with
  substrings, so re-using "strip" here should be avoided.


Reference Implementation
========================

See the pull request on GitHub [#pr]_ (not updated).


References
==========

.. [#pr] GitHub pull request with implementation
   (https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/18939)
.. [#pyid] [Python-Ideas] "New explicit methods to trim strings"
   (https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-ideas@python.org/thread/RJARZSUKCXRJIP42Z2YBBAEN5XA7KEC3/)
.. [3] "Re: [Python-ideas] adding a trim convenience function"
   (https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-ideas@python.org/thread/SJ7CKPZSKB5RWT7H3YNXOJUQ7QLD2R3X/#C2W5T7RCFSHU5XI72HG53A6R3J3SN4MV)
.. [4] "Re: [Python-Dev] strip behavior provides inconsistent results with certain strings"
   (https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-ideas@python.org/thread/XYFQMFPUV6FR2N5BGYWPBVMZ5BE5PJ6C/#XYFQMFPUV6FR2N5BGYWPBVMZ5BE5PJ6C)
.. [5] [Python-Dev] "correction of a bug"
   (https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/thread/AOZ7RFQTQLCZCTVNKESZI67PB3PSS72X/#AOZ7RFQTQLCZCTVNKESZI67PB3PSS72X)
.. [6] [Python-Dev] "str.lstrip bug?"
   (https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/thread/OJDKRIESKGTQFNLX6KZSGKU57UXNZYAN/#CYZUFFJ2Q5ZZKMJIQBZVZR4NSLK5ZPIH)
.. [7] [Python-Dev] "strip behavior provides inconsistent results with certain strings"
   (https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/thread/ZWRGCGANHGVDPP44VQKRIYOYX7LNVDVG/#ZWRGCGANHGVDPP44VQKRIYOYX7LNVDVG)
.. [#confusion] Comment listing Bug Tracker and StackOverflow issues 
   (https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-ideas@python.org/message/GRGAFIII3AX22K3N3KT7RB4DPBY3LPVG/)


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.



..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:

Commit message:

Fix example of removing copies of a prefix; Fix handling of empty string in tuple of suffixes

pep-0616.rst, after:

PEP: 616
Title: String methods to remove prefixes and suffixes
Author: Dennis Sweeney <sweeney.dennis650@gmail.com>
Sponsor: Eric V. Smith <eric@trueblade.com>
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 19-Mar-2020
Python-Version: 3.9
Post-History: 20-Mar-2020


Abstract
========

This is a proposal to add two new methods, ``cutprefix`` and
``cutsuffix``, to the APIs of Python's various string objects.  These
methods would remove a prefix or suffix (respectively) from a string,
if present, and would be added to to Unicode ``str`` objects, binary
``bytes`` and ``bytearray`` objects, and ``collections.UserString``.


Rationale
=========

There have been repeated issues on Python-Ideas [#pyid]_ [3]_,
Python-Dev [4]_ [5]_ [6]_ [7]_, the Bug Tracker, and
StackOverflow [#confusion]_, related to user confusion about the
existing ``str.lstrip`` and ``str.rstrip`` methods.  These users are
typically expecting the behavior of ``cutprefix`` and ``cutsuffix``,
but they are surprised that the parameter for ``lstrip`` is
interpreted as a set of characters, not a substring.  This repeated
issue is evidence that these methods are useful.  The new methods
allow a cleaner redirection of users to the desired behavior.

As another testimonial for the usefulness of these methods, several
users on Python-Ideas [#pyid]_ reported frequently including similar
functions in their own code for productivity.  The implementation
often contained subtle mistakes regarding the handling of the empty
string (see `Specification`_).


Specification
=============

The builtin ``str`` class will gain two new methods with roughly the
following behavior::

    def cutprefix(self, prefix, /):
        if not isinstance(self, str):
            raise TypeError()
        self_str = str(self)

        if isinstance(prefix, tuple):
            for option in tuple(prefix):
                if not isinstance(option, str):
                    raise TypeError()
                option_str = str(option)

                if self_str.startswith(option_str):
                    return self_str[len(option_str):]

            return self_str[:]

        if not isinstance(prefix, str):
            raise TypeError()

        prefix_str = str(prefix)

        if self_str.startswith(prefix_str):
            return self_str[len(prefix_str):]
        else:
            return self_str[:]


    def cutsuffix(self, suffix, /):
        if not isinstance(self, str):
            raise TypeError()
        self_str = str(self)

        if isinstance(suffix, tuple):
            for option in tuple(suffix):
                if not isinstance(option, str):
                    raise TypeError()
                option_str = str(option)

                if not option_str:
                    return self_str[:]
                if self_str.endswith(option_str):
                    return self_str[:-len(option_str)]

            return self_str[:]

        if not isinstance(suffix, str):
            raise TypeError()
        suffix_str = str(suffix)

        if suffix_str and self_str.startswith(suffix_str):
            return self_str[:-len(suffix_str)]
        else:
            return self_str[:]


Note that without the check for the truthyness of suffixes, 
``s.cutsuffix('')`` would be mishandled and always return the empty 
string due to the unintended evaluation of ``self[:-0]``.

Methods with the corresponding semantics will be added to the builtin 
``bytes`` and ``bytearray`` objects.  If ``b`` is either a ``bytes``
or ``bytearray`` object, then ``b.cutsuffix()`` and ``b.cutprefix()``
will accept any bytes-like object or tuple of bytes-like objects as an
argument.  The one-at-a-time checking of types matches the implementation
of ``startswith()`` and ``endswith()`` methods.

The ``self_str[:]`` copying behavior in the code ensures that the 
``bytearray`` methods do not return ``self``, but it does not preclude
the ``str`` and ``bytes`` methods from returning ``self``.  Because
``str`` and ``bytes`` instances are immutable, the  ``cutprefix()``
and ``cutsuffix()`` methods on these objects may (but are not
required to) make the optimization of returning ``self`` if 
``type(self) is str`` (``type(self) is bytes`` respectively)
and the given affixes are not found, or are empty.  As such, the
following behavior is considered a CPython implementation detail, and
is not guaranteed by this specification::

    >>> x = 'foobar' * 10**6
    >>> x.cutprefix('baz') is x is x.cutsuffix('baz')
    True
    >>> x.cutprefix('') is x is x.cutsuffix('')
    True

To test whether any affixes were removed during the call, users
should use the constant-time behavior of comparing the lengths of
the original and new strings::

    >>> string = 'Python String Input'
    >>> new_string = string.cutprefix("Py")
    >>> modified = (len(string) != len(new_string))
    >>> modified
    True

Users may also continue using ``startswith()`` and ``endswith()``
methods for control flow instead of testing the lengths as above.

The two methods will also be added to ``collections.UserString``, with
similar behavior.

Motivating examples from the Python standard library
====================================================

The examples below demonstrate how the proposed methods can make code
one or more of the following:

1. Less fragile:
    
   The code will not depend on the user to count the length of a literal.

2. More performant:
    
   The code does not require a call to the Python built-in ``len``
   function, nor to the more expensive ``str.replace()``
   method.

3. More descriptive:
    
   The methods give a higher-level API for code readability, as
   opposed to the traditional method of string slicing.


find_recursionlimit.py
----------------------

- Current::

    if test_func_name.startswith("test_"):
        print(test_func_name[5:])
    else:
        print(test_func_name)

- Improved::

    print(test_func_name.cutprefix("test_"))


deccheck.py
-----------

This is an interesting case because the author chose to use the
``str.replace`` method in a situation where only a prefix was
intended to be removed.

- Current::

    if funcname.startswith("context."):
        self.funcname = funcname.replace("context.", "")
        self.contextfunc = True
    else:
        self.funcname = funcname
        self.contextfunc = False

- Improved::

    if funcname.startswith("context."):
        self.funcname = funcname.cutprefix("context.")
        self.contextfunc = True
    else:
        self.funcname = funcname
        self.contextfunc = False

- Arguably further improved::

    self.contextfunc = funcname.startswith("context.")
    self.funcname = funcname.cutprefix("context.")


cookiejar.py
------------

- Current::

    def strip_quotes(text):
        if text.startswith('"'):
            text = text[1:]
        if text.endswith('"'):
            text = text[:-1]
        return text

- Improved::

    def strip_quotes(text):
        return text.cutprefix('"').cutsuffix('"')


test_concurrent_futures.py
--------------------------

In the following example, the meaning of the code changes slightly,
but in context, it behaves the same.

- Current::

    if name.endswith(('Mixin', 'Tests')):
        return name[:-5]
    elif name.endswith('Test'):
        return name[:-4]
    else:
        return name

- Improved::

    return name.cutsuffix(('Mixin', 'Tests', 'Test'))


There were many other such examples in the stdlib.


Rejected Ideas
==============

Expand the lstrip and rstrip APIs
---------------------------------

Because ``lstrip`` takes a string as its argument, it could be viewed
as taking an iterable of length-1 strings.  The API could therefore be 
generalized to accept any iterable of strings, which would be 
successively removed as prefixes.  While this behavior would be 
consistent, it would not be obvious for users to have to call 
``'foobar'.cutprefix(('foo',))`` for the common use case of a 
single prefix.

Remove multiple copies of a prefix
----------------------------------

This is the behavior that would be consistent with the aforementioned
expansion of the ``lstrip``/``rstrip`` API -- repeatedly applying the
function until the argument is unchanged.  This behavior is attainable
from the proposed behavior via by the following::
    
    >>> s = 'FooBar' * 100 + 'Baz'
    >>> prefixes = ('Bar', 'Foo')
    >>> while len(s) != len(s := s.cutprefix(prefixes)): pass
    >>> s
    'Baz'

or the more obvious and readable alternative::

    >>> s = 'FooBar' * 100 + 'Baz'
    >>> prefixes = ('Bar', 'Foo')
    >>> while s.startswith(prefixes): s = s.cutprefix(prefixes)
    >>> s
    'Baz'


Raising an exception when not found
-----------------------------------

There was a suggestion that ``s.cutprefix(pre)`` should raise an
exception if ``not s.startswith(pre)``.  However, this does not match
with the behavior and feel of other string methods.  There could be
``required=False`` keyword added, but this violates the KISS
principle.


Alternative Method Names
------------------------

Several alternatives method names have been proposed.  Some are listed
below, along with commentary for why they should be rejected in favor
of ``cutprefix`` (the same arguments hold for ``cutsuffix``).

- ``ltrim``, ``trimprefix``, etc.:

  "Trim" does in other languages (e.g. JavaScript, Java, Go, PHP)
  what ``strip`` methods do in Python.

- ``lstrip(string=...)``

  This would avoid adding a new method, but for different 
  behavior, it's better to have two different methods than one
  method with a keyword argument that select the behavior.

- ``cut_prefix``:

  All of the other methods of the string API, e.g.
  ``str.startswith()``, use ``lowercase`` rather than
  ``lower_case_with_underscores``.

- ``cutleft``, ``leftcut``, or ``lcut``:

  The explicitness of "prefix" is preferred.

- ``removeprefix``, ``deleteprefix``, ``withoutprefix``, ``dropprefix``, etc.:

  All of these might have been acceptable, but they have more
  characters than ``cut``.  Some suggested that the verb "cut"
  implies mutability, but the string API already contains verbs
  like "replace", "strip", "split", and "swapcase".

- ``stripprefix``:

  Users may benefit from remembering that "strip" means working
  with sets of characters, while other methods work with
  substrings, so re-using "strip" here should be avoided.


Reference Implementation
========================

See the pull request on GitHub [#pr]_ (not updated).


References
==========

.. [#pr] GitHub pull request with implementation
   (https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/18939)
.. [#pyid] [Python-Ideas] "New explicit methods to trim strings"
   (https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-ideas@python.org/thread/RJARZSUKCXRJIP42Z2YBBAEN5XA7KEC3/)
.. [3] "Re: [Python-ideas] adding a trim convenience function"
   (https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-ideas@python.org/thread/SJ7CKPZSKB5RWT7H3YNXOJUQ7QLD2R3X/#C2W5T7RCFSHU5XI72HG53A6R3J3SN4MV)
.. [4] "Re: [Python-Dev] strip behavior provides inconsistent results with certain strings"
   (https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-ideas@python.org/thread/XYFQMFPUV6FR2N5BGYWPBVMZ5BE5PJ6C/#XYFQMFPUV6FR2N5BGYWPBVMZ5BE5PJ6C)
.. [5] [Python-Dev] "correction of a bug"
   (https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/thread/AOZ7RFQTQLCZCTVNKESZI67PB3PSS72X/#AOZ7RFQTQLCZCTVNKESZI67PB3PSS72X)
.. [6] [Python-Dev] "str.lstrip bug?"
   (https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/thread/OJDKRIESKGTQFNLX6KZSGKU57UXNZYAN/#CYZUFFJ2Q5ZZKMJIQBZVZR4NSLK5ZPIH)
.. [7] [Python-Dev] "strip behavior provides inconsistent results with certain strings"
   (https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/thread/ZWRGCGANHGVDPP44VQKRIYOYX7LNVDVG/#ZWRGCGANHGVDPP44VQKRIYOYX7LNVDVG)
.. [#confusion] Comment listing Bug Tracker and StackOverflow issues 
   (https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-ideas@python.org/message/GRGAFIII3AX22K3N3KT7RB4DPBY3LPVG/)


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.



..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
