pep-0579.rst, before:

PEP: 579
Title: Refactoring C functions and methods
Author: Jeroen Demeyer <J.Demeyer@UGent.be>
BDFL-Delegate: Petr Viktorin
Status: Draft
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 04-Jun-2018
Post-History: 20-Jun-2018


Abstract
========

This meta-PEP collects various issues with CPython's existing implementation
of built-in functions (functions implemented in C) and methods.

Fixing all these issues is too much for one PEP,
so that will be delegated to other standards track PEPs.
However, this PEP does give some brief ideas of possible fixes.
This is mainly meant to coordinate an overall strategy.
For example, a proposed solution may sound too complicated
for fixing any one single issue, but it may be the best overall
solution for multiple issues.

This PEP is purely informational:
it does not imply that all issues will eventually
be fixed, nor that they will be fixed using the solution proposed here.

It also serves as a check-list of possible requested features
to verify that a given fix does not make those
other features harder to implement.

The major proposed change is replacing ``PyMethodDef``
by a new structure ``PyCCallDef``
which collects everything needed for calling the function/method.
In the ``PyTypeObject`` structure, a new field ``tp_ccalloffset``
is added giving an offset to a ``PyCCallDef *`` in the object structure.

**NOTE**: This PEP deals only with CPython implementation details,
it does not affect the Python language or standard library.


Issues
======

This lists various issues with built-in functions and methods,
together with a plan for a solution and (if applicable)
pointers to standards track PEPs discussing the details.


1. Naming
---------

The word "built-in" is overused in Python.
From a quick skim of the Python documentation, it mostly refers
to things from the ``builtins`` module.
In other words: things which are available in the global namespace
without a need for importing them.
This conflicts with the use of the word "built-in" to mean "implemented in C".

**Solution**: since the C structure for built-in functions and methods is already
called ``PyCFunctionObject``,
let's use the name "cfunction" and "cmethod" instead of "built-in function"
and "built-in method".


2. Not extendable
-----------------

The various classes involved (such as ``builtin_function_or_method``)
cannot be subclassed::

    >>> from types import BuiltinFunctionType
    >>> class X(BuiltinFunctionType):
    ...     pass
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
    TypeError: type 'builtin_function_or_method' is not an acceptable base type

This is a problem because it makes it impossible to add features
such as introspection support to these classes.

If one wants to implement a function in C with additional functionality,
an entirely new class must be implemented from scratch.
The problem with this is that the existing classes like
``builtin_function_or_method`` are special-cased in the Python interpreter
to allow faster calling (for example, by using ``METH_FASTCALL``).
It is currently impossible to have a custom class with the same optimizations.

**Solution**: make the existing optimizations available to arbitrary classes.
This is done by adding a new ``PyTypeObject`` field ``tp_ccalloffset``
(or can we re-use ``tp_print`` for that?)
specifying the offset of a ``PyCCallDef`` pointer.
This is a new structure holding all information needed to call
a cfunction and it would be used instead of ``PyMethodDef``.
This implements the new "C call" protocol.

For constructing cfunctions and cmethods, ``PyMethodDef`` arrays
will still be used (for example, in ``tp_methods``) but that will
be the *only* remaining purpose of the ``PyMethodDef`` structure.

Additionally, we can also make some function classes subclassable.
However, this seems less important once we have ``tp_ccalloffset``.

**Reference**: PEP 580


3. cfunctions do not become methods
-----------------------------------

A cfunction like ``repr`` does not implement ``__get__`` to bind
as a method::

    >>> class X:
    ...     meth = repr
    >>> x = X()
    >>> x.meth()
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
    TypeError: repr() takes exactly one argument (0 given)

In this example, one would have expected that ``x.meth()`` returns
``repr(x)`` by applying the normal rules of methods.

This is surprising and a needless difference
between cfunctions and Python functions.
For the standard built-in functions, this is not really a problem
since those are not meant to used as methods.
But it does become a problem when one wants to implement a
new cfunction with the goal of being usable as method.

Again, a solution could be to create a new class behaving just
like cfunctions but which bind as methods.
However, that would lose some existing optimizations for methods,
such as the ``LOAD_METHOD``/``CALL_METHOD`` opcodes.

**Solution**: the same as the previous issue.
It just shows that handling ``self`` and ``__get__``
should be part of the new C call protocol.

For backwards compatibility, we would keep the existing non-binding
behavior of cfunctions. We would just allow it in custom classes.

**Reference**: PEP 580


4. Semantics of inspect.isfunction
----------------------------------

Currently, ``inspect.isfunction`` returns ``True`` only for instances
of ``types.FunctionType``.
That is, true Python functions.

A common use case for ``inspect.isfunction`` is checking for introspection:
it guarantees for example that ``inspect.getfile()`` will work.
Ideally, it should be possible for other classes to be treated as
functions too.

**Solution**: introduce a new ``InspectFunction`` abstract base class
and use that to implement ``inspect.isfunction``.
Alternatively, use duck typing for ``inspect.isfunction``
(as proposed in [#bpo30071]_)::

    def isfunction(obj):
        return hasattr(type(obj), "__code__")


5. C functions should have access to the function object
--------------------------------------------------------

The underlying C function of a cfunction currently
takes a ``self`` argument (for bound methods)
and then possibly a number of arguments.
There is no way for the C function to actually access the Python
cfunction object (the ``self`` in ``__call__`` or ``tp_call``).
This would for example allow implementing the
C call protocol for Python functions (``types.FunctionType``):
the C function which implements calling Python functions
needs access to the ``__code__`` attribute of the function.

This is also needed for PEP 573
where all cfunctions require access to their "parent"
(the module for functions of a module or the defining class
for methods).

**Solution**: add a new ``PyMethodDef`` flag to specify
that the C function takes an additional argument (as first argument),
namely the function object.

**References**: PEP 580, PEP 573


6. METH_FASTCALL is private and undocumented
--------------------------------------------

The ``METH_FASTCALL`` mechanism allows calling cfunctions and cmethods
using a C array of Python objects instead of a ``tuple``.
This was introduced in Python 3.6 for positional arguments only
and extended in Python 3.7 with support for keyword arguments.

However, given that it is undocumented,
it is presumably only supposed to be used by CPython itself.

**Solution**: since this is an important optimization,
everybody should be encouraged to use it.
Now that the implementation of ``METH_FASTCALL`` is stable, document it!

As part of the C call protocol, we should also add a C API function ::

    PyObject *PyCCall_FastCall(PyObject *func, PyObject *const *args, Py_ssize_t nargs, PyObject *keywords)

**Reference**: PEP 580


7. Allowing native C arguments
------------------------------

A cfunction always takes its arguments as Python objects
(say, an array of ``PyObject`` pointers).
In cases where the cfunction is really wrapping a native C function
(for example, coming from ``ctypes`` or some compiler like Cython),
this is inefficient: calls from C code to C code are forced to use
Python objects to pass arguments.

Analogous to the buffer protocol which allows access to C data,
we should also allow access to the underlying C callable.

**Solution**: when wrapping a C function with native arguments
(for example, a C ``long``) inside a cfunction,
we should also store a function pointer to the underlying C function,
together with its C signature.

Argument Clinic could automatically do this by storing
a pointer to the "impl" function.


8. Complexity
-------------

There are a huge number of classes involved to implement
all variations of methods.
This is not a problem by itself, but a compounding issue.

For ordinary Python classes, the table below gives the classes
for various kinds of methods.
The columns refer to the class in the class ``__dict__``,
the class for unbound methods (bound to the class)
and the class for bound methods (bound to the instance):

=============  ================ ============ ============
kind           __dict__         unbound      bound
=============  ================ ============ ============
Normal method  ``function``     ``function`` ``method``
Static method  ``staticmethod`` ``function`` ``function``
Class method   ``classmethod``  ``method``   ``method``
Slot method    ``function``     ``function`` ``method``
=============  ================ ============ ============

This is the analogous table for extension types (C classes):

=============  ========================== ============================== ==============================
kind           __dict__                   unbound                        bound
=============  ========================== ============================== ==============================
Normal method  ``method_descriptor``      ``method_descriptor``          ``builtin_function_or_method``
Static method  ``staticmethod``           ``builtin_function_or_method`` ``builtin_function_or_method``
Class method   ``classmethod_descriptor`` ``builtin_function_or_method`` ``builtin_function_or_method``
Slot method    ``wrapper_descriptor``     ``wrapper_descriptor``         ``method-wrapper``
=============  ========================== ============================== ==============================

There are a lot of classes involved
and these two tables look very different.
There is no good reason why Python methods should be
treated fundamentally different from C methods.
Also the features are slightly different:
for example, ``method`` supports ``__func__``
but ``builtin_function_or_method`` does not.

Since CPython has optimizations for calls to most of these objects,
the code for dealing with them can also become complex.
A good example of this is the ``call_function`` function in ``Python/ceval.c``.

**Solution**: all these classes should implement the C call protocol.
Then the complexity in the code can mostly be fixed by
checking for the C call protocol (``tp_ccalloffset != 0``)
instead of doing type checks.

Furthermore, it should be investigated whether some of these classes can be merged
and whether ``method`` can be re-used also for bound methods of extension types
(see PEP 576 for the latter,
keeping in mind that this may have some minor backwards compatibility issues).
This is not a goal by itself but just something to keep in mind
when working on these classes.


9. PyMethodDef is too limited
-----------------------------

The typical way to create a cfunction or cmethod in an extension module
is by using a ``PyMethodDef`` to define it.
These are then stored in an array ``PyModuleDef.m_methods``
(for cfunctions) or ``PyTypeObject.tp_methods`` (for cmethods).
However, because of the stable ABI (PEP 384),
we cannot change the ``PyMethodDef`` structure.

So, this means that we cannot add new fields for creating cfunctions/cmethods
this way.
This is probably the reason for the hack that
``__doc__`` and ``__text_signature__`` are stored in the same C string
(with the ``__doc__`` and ``__text_signature__`` descriptors extracting
the relevant part).

**Solution**: stop assuming that a single ``PyMethodDef`` entry
is sufficient to describe a cfunction/cmethod.
Instead, we could add some flag which means that one of the ``PyMethodDef``
fields is instead a pointer to an additional structure.
Or, we could add a flag to use two or more consecutive ``PyMethodDef``
entries in the array to store more data.
Then the ``PyMethodDef`` array would be used only to construct
cfunctions/cmethods but it would no longer be used after that.


10. Slot wrappers have no custom documentation
----------------------------------------------

Right now, slot wrappers like ``__init__`` or ``__lt__`` only have very
generic documentation, not at all specific to the class::

    >>> list.__init__.__doc__
    'Initialize self.  See help(type(self)) for accurate signature.'
    >>> list.__lt__.__doc__
    'Return self<value.'

The same happens for the signature::

    >>> list.__init__.__text_signature__
    '($self, /, *args, **kwargs)'

As you can see, slot wrappers do support ``__doc__``
and ``__text_signature__``.
The problem is that these are stored in ``struct wrapperbase``,
which is common for all wrappers of a specific slot
(for example, the same ``wrapperbase`` is used for ``str.__eq__`` and ``int.__eq__``).

**Solution**: rethink the slot wrapper class to allow docstrings
(and text signatures) for each instance separately.

This still leaves the question of how extension modules
should specify the documentation.
The ``PyTypeObject`` entries like ``tp_init`` are just function pointers,
we cannot do anything with those.
One solution would be to add entries to the ``tp_methods`` array
just for adding docstrings.
Such an entry could look like ::

    {"__init__", NULL, METH_SLOTDOC, "pointer to __init__ doc goes here"}


11. Static methods and class methods should be callable
-------------------------------------------------------

Instances of ``staticmethod`` and ``classmethod`` should be callable.
Admittedly, there is no strong use case for this,
but it has occasionally been requested (see for example [#bpo20309]_).

Making static/class methods callable would increase consistency.
First of all, function decorators typically add functionality or modify
a function, but the result remains callable. This is not true for
``@staticmethod`` and ``@classmethod``.

Second, class methods of extension types are already callable::

    >>> fromhex = float.__dict__["fromhex"]
    >>> type(fromhex)
    <class 'classmethod_descriptor'>
    >>> fromhex(float, "0xff")
    255.0

Third, one can see ``function``, ``staticmethod`` and ``classmethod``
as different kinds of unbound methods:
they all become ``method`` when bound, but the implementation of ``__get__``
is slightly different.
From this point of view, it looks strange that ``function`` is callable
but the others are not.

**Solution**:
when changing the implementation of ``staticmethod``, ``classmethod``,
we should consider making instances callable.
Even if this is not a goal by itself, it may happen naturally
because of the implementation.


References
==========

.. [#bpo20309] Not all method descriptors are callable
   (https://bugs.python.org/issue20309)

.. [#bpo30071] Duck-typing inspect.isfunction()
   (https://bugs.python.org/issue30071)


Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.



..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:

Commit message:

PEP 579: Accept (with a reminder on informational PEPs)

pep-0579.rst, after:

PEP: 579
Title: Refactoring C functions and methods
Author: Jeroen Demeyer <J.Demeyer@UGent.be>
BDFL-Delegate: Petr Viktorin
Status: Accepted
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 04-Jun-2018
Post-History: 20-Jun-2018


Approval Notice
===============

This PEP describes design issues addressed in PEP 575, PEP 580, PEP 590
(and possibly later proposals).

As noted in `PEP 1 <https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0001/#pep-types>`_:

   Informational PEPs do not necessarily represent a Python community
   consensus or recommendation, so users and implementers are free to
   ignore Informational PEPs or follow their advice.

While there is no concensus on whether the issues or the solutions in
this PEP are valid, the list is still useful to guide further design.


Abstract
========

This meta-PEP collects various issues with CPython's existing implementation
of built-in functions (functions implemented in C) and methods.

Fixing all these issues is too much for one PEP,
so that will be delegated to other standards track PEPs.
However, this PEP does give some brief ideas of possible fixes.
This is mainly meant to coordinate an overall strategy.
For example, a proposed solution may sound too complicated
for fixing any one single issue, but it may be the best overall
solution for multiple issues.

This PEP is purely informational:
it does not imply that all issues will eventually
be fixed, nor that they will be fixed using the solution proposed here.

It also serves as a check-list of possible requested features
to verify that a given fix does not make those
other features harder to implement.

The major proposed change is replacing ``PyMethodDef``
by a new structure ``PyCCallDef``
which collects everything needed for calling the function/method.
In the ``PyTypeObject`` structure, a new field ``tp_ccalloffset``
is added giving an offset to a ``PyCCallDef *`` in the object structure.

**NOTE**: This PEP deals only with CPython implementation details,
it does not affect the Python language or standard library.


Issues
======

This lists various issues with built-in functions and methods,
together with a plan for a solution and (if applicable)
pointers to standards track PEPs discussing the details.


1. Naming
---------

The word "built-in" is overused in Python.
From a quick skim of the Python documentation, it mostly refers
to things from the ``builtins`` module.
In other words: things which are available in the global namespace
without a need for importing them.
This conflicts with the use of the word "built-in" to mean "implemented in C".

**Solution**: since the C structure for built-in functions and methods is already
called ``PyCFunctionObject``,
let's use the name "cfunction" and "cmethod" instead of "built-in function"
and "built-in method".


2. Not extendable
-----------------

The various classes involved (such as ``builtin_function_or_method``)
cannot be subclassed::

    >>> from types import BuiltinFunctionType
    >>> class X(BuiltinFunctionType):
    ...     pass
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
    TypeError: type 'builtin_function_or_method' is not an acceptable base type

This is a problem because it makes it impossible to add features
such as introspection support to these classes.

If one wants to implement a function in C with additional functionality,
an entirely new class must be implemented from scratch.
The problem with this is that the existing classes like
``builtin_function_or_method`` are special-cased in the Python interpreter
to allow faster calling (for example, by using ``METH_FASTCALL``).
It is currently impossible to have a custom class with the same optimizations.

**Solution**: make the existing optimizations available to arbitrary classes.
This is done by adding a new ``PyTypeObject`` field ``tp_ccalloffset``
(or can we re-use ``tp_print`` for that?)
specifying the offset of a ``PyCCallDef`` pointer.
This is a new structure holding all information needed to call
a cfunction and it would be used instead of ``PyMethodDef``.
This implements the new "C call" protocol.

For constructing cfunctions and cmethods, ``PyMethodDef`` arrays
will still be used (for example, in ``tp_methods``) but that will
be the *only* remaining purpose of the ``PyMethodDef`` structure.

Additionally, we can also make some function classes subclassable.
However, this seems less important once we have ``tp_ccalloffset``.

**Reference**: PEP 580


3. cfunctions do not become methods
-----------------------------------

A cfunction like ``repr`` does not implement ``__get__`` to bind
as a method::

    >>> class X:
    ...     meth = repr
    >>> x = X()
    >>> x.meth()
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
    TypeError: repr() takes exactly one argument (0 given)

In this example, one would have expected that ``x.meth()`` returns
``repr(x)`` by applying the normal rules of methods.

This is surprising and a needless difference
between cfunctions and Python functions.
For the standard built-in functions, this is not really a problem
since those are not meant to used as methods.
But it does become a problem when one wants to implement a
new cfunction with the goal of being usable as method.

Again, a solution could be to create a new class behaving just
like cfunctions but which bind as methods.
However, that would lose some existing optimizations for methods,
such as the ``LOAD_METHOD``/``CALL_METHOD`` opcodes.

**Solution**: the same as the previous issue.
It just shows that handling ``self`` and ``__get__``
should be part of the new C call protocol.

For backwards compatibility, we would keep the existing non-binding
behavior of cfunctions. We would just allow it in custom classes.

**Reference**: PEP 580


4. Semantics of inspect.isfunction
----------------------------------

Currently, ``inspect.isfunction`` returns ``True`` only for instances
of ``types.FunctionType``.
That is, true Python functions.

A common use case for ``inspect.isfunction`` is checking for introspection:
it guarantees for example that ``inspect.getfile()`` will work.
Ideally, it should be possible for other classes to be treated as
functions too.

**Solution**: introduce a new ``InspectFunction`` abstract base class
and use that to implement ``inspect.isfunction``.
Alternatively, use duck typing for ``inspect.isfunction``
(as proposed in [#bpo30071]_)::

    def isfunction(obj):
        return hasattr(type(obj), "__code__")


5. C functions should have access to the function object
--------------------------------------------------------

The underlying C function of a cfunction currently
takes a ``self`` argument (for bound methods)
and then possibly a number of arguments.
There is no way for the C function to actually access the Python
cfunction object (the ``self`` in ``__call__`` or ``tp_call``).
This would for example allow implementing the
C call protocol for Python functions (``types.FunctionType``):
the C function which implements calling Python functions
needs access to the ``__code__`` attribute of the function.

This is also needed for PEP 573
where all cfunctions require access to their "parent"
(the module for functions of a module or the defining class
for methods).

**Solution**: add a new ``PyMethodDef`` flag to specify
that the C function takes an additional argument (as first argument),
namely the function object.

**References**: PEP 580, PEP 573


6. METH_FASTCALL is private and undocumented
--------------------------------------------

The ``METH_FASTCALL`` mechanism allows calling cfunctions and cmethods
using a C array of Python objects instead of a ``tuple``.
This was introduced in Python 3.6 for positional arguments only
and extended in Python 3.7 with support for keyword arguments.

However, given that it is undocumented,
it is presumably only supposed to be used by CPython itself.

**Solution**: since this is an important optimization,
everybody should be encouraged to use it.
Now that the implementation of ``METH_FASTCALL`` is stable, document it!

As part of the C call protocol, we should also add a C API function ::

    PyObject *PyCCall_FastCall(PyObject *func, PyObject *const *args, Py_ssize_t nargs, PyObject *keywords)

**Reference**: PEP 580


7. Allowing native C arguments
------------------------------

A cfunction always takes its arguments as Python objects
(say, an array of ``PyObject`` pointers).
In cases where the cfunction is really wrapping a native C function
(for example, coming from ``ctypes`` or some compiler like Cython),
this is inefficient: calls from C code to C code are forced to use
Python objects to pass arguments.

Analogous to the buffer protocol which allows access to C data,
we should also allow access to the underlying C callable.

**Solution**: when wrapping a C function with native arguments
(for example, a C ``long``) inside a cfunction,
we should also store a function pointer to the underlying C function,
together with its C signature.

Argument Clinic could automatically do this by storing
a pointer to the "impl" function.


8. Complexity
-------------

There are a huge number of classes involved to implement
all variations of methods.
This is not a problem by itself, but a compounding issue.

For ordinary Python classes, the table below gives the classes
for various kinds of methods.
The columns refer to the class in the class ``__dict__``,
the class for unbound methods (bound to the class)
and the class for bound methods (bound to the instance):

=============  ================ ============ ============
kind           __dict__         unbound      bound
=============  ================ ============ ============
Normal method  ``function``     ``function`` ``method``
Static method  ``staticmethod`` ``function`` ``function``
Class method   ``classmethod``  ``method``   ``method``
Slot method    ``function``     ``function`` ``method``
=============  ================ ============ ============

This is the analogous table for extension types (C classes):

=============  ========================== ============================== ==============================
kind           __dict__                   unbound                        bound
=============  ========================== ============================== ==============================
Normal method  ``method_descriptor``      ``method_descriptor``          ``builtin_function_or_method``
Static method  ``staticmethod``           ``builtin_function_or_method`` ``builtin_function_or_method``
Class method   ``classmethod_descriptor`` ``builtin_function_or_method`` ``builtin_function_or_method``
Slot method    ``wrapper_descriptor``     ``wrapper_descriptor``         ``method-wrapper``
=============  ========================== ============================== ==============================

There are a lot of classes involved
and these two tables look very different.
There is no good reason why Python methods should be
treated fundamentally different from C methods.
Also the features are slightly different:
for example, ``method`` supports ``__func__``
but ``builtin_function_or_method`` does not.

Since CPython has optimizations for calls to most of these objects,
the code for dealing with them can also become complex.
A good example of this is the ``call_function`` function in ``Python/ceval.c``.

**Solution**: all these classes should implement the C call protocol.
Then the complexity in the code can mostly be fixed by
checking for the C call protocol (``tp_ccalloffset != 0``)
instead of doing type checks.

Furthermore, it should be investigated whether some of these classes can be merged
and whether ``method`` can be re-used also for bound methods of extension types
(see PEP 576 for the latter,
keeping in mind that this may have some minor backwards compatibility issues).
This is not a goal by itself but just something to keep in mind
when working on these classes.


9. PyMethodDef is too limited
-----------------------------

The typical way to create a cfunction or cmethod in an extension module
is by using a ``PyMethodDef`` to define it.
These are then stored in an array ``PyModuleDef.m_methods``
(for cfunctions) or ``PyTypeObject.tp_methods`` (for cmethods).
However, because of the stable ABI (PEP 384),
we cannot change the ``PyMethodDef`` structure.

So, this means that we cannot add new fields for creating cfunctions/cmethods
this way.
This is probably the reason for the hack that
``__doc__`` and ``__text_signature__`` are stored in the same C string
(with the ``__doc__`` and ``__text_signature__`` descriptors extracting
the relevant part).

**Solution**: stop assuming that a single ``PyMethodDef`` entry
is sufficient to describe a cfunction/cmethod.
Instead, we could add some flag which means that one of the ``PyMethodDef``
fields is instead a pointer to an additional structure.
Or, we could add a flag to use two or more consecutive ``PyMethodDef``
entries in the array to store more data.
Then the ``PyMethodDef`` array would be used only to construct
cfunctions/cmethods but it would no longer be used after that.


10. Slot wrappers have no custom documentation
----------------------------------------------

Right now, slot wrappers like ``__init__`` or ``__lt__`` only have very
generic documentation, not at all specific to the class::

    >>> list.__init__.__doc__
    'Initialize self.  See help(type(self)) for accurate signature.'
    >>> list.__lt__.__doc__
    'Return self<value.'

The same happens for the signature::

    >>> list.__init__.__text_signature__
    '($self, /, *args, **kwargs)'

As you can see, slot wrappers do support ``__doc__``
and ``__text_signature__``.
The problem is that these are stored in ``struct wrapperbase``,
which is common for all wrappers of a specific slot
(for example, the same ``wrapperbase`` is used for ``str.__eq__`` and ``int.__eq__``).

**Solution**: rethink the slot wrapper class to allow docstrings
(and text signatures) for each instance separately.

This still leaves the question of how extension modules
should specify the documentation.
The ``PyTypeObject`` entries like ``tp_init`` are just function pointers,
we cannot do anything with those.
One solution would be to add entries to the ``tp_methods`` array
just for adding docstrings.
Such an entry could look like ::

    {"__init__", NULL, METH_SLOTDOC, "pointer to __init__ doc goes here"}


11. Static methods and class methods should be callable
-------------------------------------------------------

Instances of ``staticmethod`` and ``classmethod`` should be callable.
Admittedly, there is no strong use case for this,
but it has occasionally been requested (see for example [#bpo20309]_).

Making static/class methods callable would increase consistency.
First of all, function decorators typically add functionality or modify
a function, but the result remains callable. This is not true for
``@staticmethod`` and ``@classmethod``.

Second, class methods of extension types are already callable::

    >>> fromhex = float.__dict__["fromhex"]
    >>> type(fromhex)
    <class 'classmethod_descriptor'>
    >>> fromhex(float, "0xff")
    255.0

Third, one can see ``function``, ``staticmethod`` and ``classmethod``
as different kinds of unbound methods:
they all become ``method`` when bound, but the implementation of ``__get__``
is slightly different.
From this point of view, it looks strange that ``function`` is callable
but the others are not.

**Solution**:
when changing the implementation of ``staticmethod``, ``classmethod``,
we should consider making instances callable.
Even if this is not a goal by itself, it may happen naturally
because of the implementation.


References
==========

.. [#bpo20309] Not all method descriptors are callable
   (https://bugs.python.org/issue20309)

.. [#bpo30071] Duck-typing inspect.isfunction()
   (https://bugs.python.org/issue30071)


Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.



..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
