pep-0651.rst, before:

PEP: 651
Title: Robust Overflow Handling
Author: Mark Shannon <mark@hotpy.org>
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 18-Jan-2021
Post-History: 19-Jan-2021


Abstract
========

This PEP proposes that machine stack overflow is treated differently from runaway recursion.
This would allow programs to set the maximum recursion depth to fit their needs
and provide additional safety guarantees.

The following program will run safely to completion::

  sys.setrecursionlimit(1_000_000)

  def f(n):
      if n:
          f(n-1)

  f(500_000)

The following program will raise a ``StackOverflow``, without causing a VM crash::

  sys.setrecursionlimit(1_000_000)

  class X:
      def __add__(self, other):
          return self + other

  X() + 1

Motivation
==========

CPython uses a single recursion depth counter to prevent both runaway recursion and C stack overflow.
However, runaway recursion and machine stack overflow are two different things.
Allowing machine stack overflow is a potential security vulnerability, but limiting recursion depth can prevent the 
use of some algorithms in Python.

Currently, if a program needs to deeply recurse it must manage the maximum recursion depth allowed,
hopefully managing to set it in the region between the minimum needed to run correctly and the maximum that is safe
to avoid a memory protection error.

By separating the checks for C stack overflow from checks for recursion depth,
pure Python programs can run safely, using whatever level of recursion they require.

Rationale
=========

CPython currently relies on a single limit to guard against potentially dangerous stack overflow
in the virtual machine and to guard against run away recursion in the Python program.

This is a consequence of the implementation which couples the C and Python call stacks.
By breaking this coupling, we can improve both the usability of CPython and its safety.

The recursion limit exists to protect against runaway recursion, the integrity of the virtual machine should not depend on it.
Similarly, recursion should not be limited by implementation details.

Specification
=============

Two new exception classes will be added, ``StackOverflow`` and ``RecursionOverflow``, both of which will be
sub-classes of ``RecursionError``

StackOverflow exception
-----------------------

A ``StackOverflow`` exception will be raised whenever the interpreter or builtin module code
determines that the C stack is at or nearing a limit of safety.
``StackOverflow`` is a sub-class of ``RecursionError``,
so any code that handles ``RecursionError`` will handle ``StackOverflow``

RecursionOverflow exception
---------------------------

A ``RecursionOverflow`` exception will be raised when a call to a Python function
causes the recursion limit to be exceeded.
This is a slight change from current behavior which raises a ``RecursionError``.
``RecursionOverflow`` is a sub-class of ``RecursionError``,
so any code that handles ``RecursionError`` will continue to work as before.

Decoupling the Python stack from the C stack
--------------------------------------------

In order to provide the above guarantees and ensure that any program that worked previously 
continues to do so, the Python and C stack will need to be separated.
That is, calls to Python functions from Python functions, should not consume space on the C stack.
Calls to and from builtin functions will continue to consume space on the C stack.

The size of the C stack will be implementation defined, and may vary from machine to machine.
It may even differ between threads. However, there is an expectation that any code that could run
with the recursion limit set to the previous default value, will continue to run.

Many operations in Python perform some sort of call at the C level.
Most of these will continue to consume C stack, and will result in a
``StackOverflow`` exception if uncontrolled recursion occurs.


Other Implementations
---------------------

Other implementations are required to fail safely regardless of what value the recursion limit is set to.

If the implementation couples the Python stack to the underlying VM or hardware stack,
then it should raise a ``RecursionOverflow`` exception when the recursion limit is exceeded, 
but the underlying stack does not overflow.
If the underlying stack overflows, or is near to overflow,
then a ``StackOverflow`` exception should be raised.

C-API
-----

There will be no C-API for modifying Python recursion depth.
It will be managed internally by the interpreter.

Py_CheckStackDepth()
''''''''''''''''''''

``int Py_CheckStackDepth(const char *where)``
will return 0 if there is no immediate danger of C stack overflow.
It will return -1 and set an exception, if the C stack is near to overflowing.


Py_CheckStackDepthWithHeadRoom()
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

``int Py_CheckStackDepthWithHeadroom(const char *where, int headroom)``
Behaves like ``Py_CheckStackDepth(where)`` but reduces the effective stack size
by ``headroom`` bytes when determining the risk of C stack overflow.
This function should be used when additional C stack will be
needed for cleanup.

``Py_CheckStackDepth(where)`` is equivalent to ``Py_CheckStackDepthWithHeadRoom(where, 0)``.

Unless absolutely necessary to perform complex cleanup,
authors of extension modules are advised to use ``Py_CheckStackDepth()``
and return immediately on failure.

Py_EnterRecursiveCall()
'''''''''''''''''''''''

This will become a synonym for Py_CheckStackDepth().

PyLeaveRecursiveCall()
''''''''''''''''''''''

This will have no effect.


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

This feature is fully backwards compatibile at the Python level.
Some low-level tools, such as machine-code debuggers, will need to be modified.
For example, the gdb scripts for Python will need to be aware that there may be more than one Python frame
per C frame.

C code that uses the ``Py_EnterRecursiveCall()``, ``PyLeaveRecursiveCall()`` pair of 
functions will continue to work correctly.

New code should use the ``Py_CheckStackDepth()`` function.

Security Implications
=====================

It will no longer be possible to crash the CPython virtual machine through recursion.

Performance Impact
==================

It is unlikely that the performance impact will be signficant.

The additional logic required will probably have a very small negative impact on performance.
The improved locality of reference from reduced C stack use should have some small positive impact.

It is hard to predict whether the overall effect will be positive or negative,
but it is quite likely that the net effect will be too small to be measured.


Implementation
==============

Notes
-----

Gauging whether a C stack overflow is imminent is difficult. So we need to be conservative.
We need to determine a safe bounds for the stack, which is not something possible in portable C code.

For major platforms, the platform specific API will be used to provide an accurate stack bounds.
However, for minor platforms some amount of guessing may be required.
While this might sound bad, it is no worse than the current situation, where we guess that the 
size of the C stack is at least 1000 times the stack space required for the chain of calls from
``_PyEval_EvalFrameDefault`` to ``_PyEval_EvalFrameDefault``. 

This means that in some cases the amount of recursion possible may be reduced.
In general, however, the amount of recursion possible should be increased, as many calls will use no C stack.

Our general approach to determining a limit for the C stack is to get an address within the current C frame,
as early as possible in the call chain. The limit can then be guessed by adding some constant to that.


Rejected Ideas
==============

None, as yet.


Open Issues
===========

None, as yet.

Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.



..
    Local Variables:
    mode: indented-text
    indent-tabs-mode: nil
    sentence-end-double-space: t
    fill-column: 70
    coding: utf-8
    End:

Commit message:

PEP 651: Clarify that examples in abstract refer to the PEP being accepted, not now.

pep-0651.rst, after:

PEP: 651
Title: Robust Overflow Handling
Author: Mark Shannon <mark@hotpy.org>
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 18-Jan-2021
Post-History: 19-Jan-2021


Abstract
========

This PEP proposes that machine stack overflow is treated differently from runaway recursion.
This would allow programs to set the maximum recursion depth to fit their needs
and provide additional safety guarantees.

If this PEP is accepted, then the following program will run safely to completion::

  sys.setrecursionlimit(1_000_000)

  def f(n):
      if n:
          f(n-1)

  f(500_000)

and the following program will raise a ``StackOverflow``, without causing a VM crash::

  sys.setrecursionlimit(1_000_000)

  class X:
      def __add__(self, other):
          return self + other

  X() + 1

Motivation
==========

CPython uses a single recursion depth counter to prevent both runaway recursion and C stack overflow.
However, runaway recursion and machine stack overflow are two different things.
Allowing machine stack overflow is a potential security vulnerability, but limiting recursion depth can prevent the 
use of some algorithms in Python.

Currently, if a program needs to deeply recurse it must manage the maximum recursion depth allowed,
hopefully managing to set it in the region between the minimum needed to run correctly and the maximum that is safe
to avoid a memory protection error.

By separating the checks for C stack overflow from checks for recursion depth,
pure Python programs can run safely, using whatever level of recursion they require.

Rationale
=========

CPython currently relies on a single limit to guard against potentially dangerous stack overflow
in the virtual machine and to guard against run away recursion in the Python program.

This is a consequence of the implementation which couples the C and Python call stacks.
By breaking this coupling, we can improve both the usability of CPython and its safety.

The recursion limit exists to protect against runaway recursion, the integrity of the virtual machine should not depend on it.
Similarly, recursion should not be limited by implementation details.

Specification
=============

Two new exception classes will be added, ``StackOverflow`` and ``RecursionOverflow``, both of which will be
sub-classes of ``RecursionError``

StackOverflow exception
-----------------------

A ``StackOverflow`` exception will be raised whenever the interpreter or builtin module code
determines that the C stack is at or nearing a limit of safety.
``StackOverflow`` is a sub-class of ``RecursionError``,
so any code that handles ``RecursionError`` will handle ``StackOverflow``

RecursionOverflow exception
---------------------------

A ``RecursionOverflow`` exception will be raised when a call to a Python function
causes the recursion limit to be exceeded.
This is a slight change from current behavior which raises a ``RecursionError``.
``RecursionOverflow`` is a sub-class of ``RecursionError``,
so any code that handles ``RecursionError`` will continue to work as before.

Decoupling the Python stack from the C stack
--------------------------------------------

In order to provide the above guarantees and ensure that any program that worked previously 
continues to do so, the Python and C stack will need to be separated.
That is, calls to Python functions from Python functions, should not consume space on the C stack.
Calls to and from builtin functions will continue to consume space on the C stack.

The size of the C stack will be implementation defined, and may vary from machine to machine.
It may even differ between threads. However, there is an expectation that any code that could run
with the recursion limit set to the previous default value, will continue to run.

Many operations in Python perform some sort of call at the C level.
Most of these will continue to consume C stack, and will result in a
``StackOverflow`` exception if uncontrolled recursion occurs.


Other Implementations
---------------------

Other implementations are required to fail safely regardless of what value the recursion limit is set to.

If the implementation couples the Python stack to the underlying VM or hardware stack,
then it should raise a ``RecursionOverflow`` exception when the recursion limit is exceeded, 
but the underlying stack does not overflow.
If the underlying stack overflows, or is near to overflow,
then a ``StackOverflow`` exception should be raised.

C-API
-----

There will be no C-API for modifying Python recursion depth.
It will be managed internally by the interpreter.

Py_CheckStackDepth()
''''''''''''''''''''

``int Py_CheckStackDepth(const char *where)``
will return 0 if there is no immediate danger of C stack overflow.
It will return -1 and set an exception, if the C stack is near to overflowing.


Py_CheckStackDepthWithHeadRoom()
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

``int Py_CheckStackDepthWithHeadroom(const char *where, int headroom)``
Behaves like ``Py_CheckStackDepth(where)`` but reduces the effective stack size
by ``headroom`` bytes when determining the risk of C stack overflow.
This function should be used when additional C stack will be
needed for cleanup.

``Py_CheckStackDepth(where)`` is equivalent to ``Py_CheckStackDepthWithHeadRoom(where, 0)``.

Unless absolutely necessary to perform complex cleanup,
authors of extension modules are advised to use ``Py_CheckStackDepth()``
and return immediately on failure.

Py_EnterRecursiveCall()
'''''''''''''''''''''''

This will become a synonym for Py_CheckStackDepth().

PyLeaveRecursiveCall()
''''''''''''''''''''''

This will have no effect.


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

This feature is fully backwards compatibile at the Python level.
Some low-level tools, such as machine-code debuggers, will need to be modified.
For example, the gdb scripts for Python will need to be aware that there may be more than one Python frame
per C frame.

C code that uses the ``Py_EnterRecursiveCall()``, ``PyLeaveRecursiveCall()`` pair of 
functions will continue to work correctly.

New code should use the ``Py_CheckStackDepth()`` function.

Security Implications
=====================

It will no longer be possible to crash the CPython virtual machine through recursion.

Performance Impact
==================

It is unlikely that the performance impact will be signficant.

The additional logic required will probably have a very small negative impact on performance.
The improved locality of reference from reduced C stack use should have some small positive impact.

It is hard to predict whether the overall effect will be positive or negative,
but it is quite likely that the net effect will be too small to be measured.


Implementation
==============

Notes
-----

Gauging whether a C stack overflow is imminent is difficult. So we need to be conservative.
We need to determine a safe bounds for the stack, which is not something possible in portable C code.

For major platforms, the platform specific API will be used to provide an accurate stack bounds.
However, for minor platforms some amount of guessing may be required.
While this might sound bad, it is no worse than the current situation, where we guess that the 
size of the C stack is at least 1000 times the stack space required for the chain of calls from
``_PyEval_EvalFrameDefault`` to ``_PyEval_EvalFrameDefault``. 

This means that in some cases the amount of recursion possible may be reduced.
In general, however, the amount of recursion possible should be increased, as many calls will use no C stack.

Our general approach to determining a limit for the C stack is to get an address within the current C frame,
as early as possible in the call chain. The limit can then be guessed by adding some constant to that.


Rejected Ideas
==============

None, as yet.


Open Issues
===========

None, as yet.

Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.



..
    Local Variables:
    mode: indented-text
    indent-tabs-mode: nil
    sentence-end-double-space: t
    fill-column: 70
    coding: utf-8
    End:
