PEP: 670
Title: Convert macros to functions in the Python C API
Author: Erlend Egeberg Aasland <erlend.aasland@protonmail.com>,
        Victor Stinner <vstinner@python.org>
Status: Final
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 19-Oct-2021
Python-Version: 3.11
Post-History: `20-Oct-2021 <https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/thread/2GN646CGWGTO6ZHHU7JTA5XWDF4ULM77/>`__,
              `08-Feb-2022 <https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/thread/IJ3IBVY3JDPROKX55YNDT6XZTVTTPGOP/>`__,
              `22-Feb-2022 <https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/thread/VM6I3UHVMME6QRSUOYLK6N2OZHP454W6/>`__
Resolution: https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/thread/QQFCJ7LR36RUZSC3WI6WZZMQVQ3ZI4MS/


Abstract
========

Macros in the C API will be converted to static inline functions or
regular functions. This will help avoid macro pitfalls in C/C++, and
make the functions usable from other programming languages.

To avoid compiler warnings, function arguments of pointer types
will be cast to appropriate types using additional macros.
The cast will not be done in the limited C API version 3.11:
users who opt in to the new limited API may need to add casts to
the exact expected type.

To avoid introducing incompatible changes, macros which can be used as
l-value in an assignment will not be converted.


Rationale
=========

The use of macros may have unintended adverse effects that are hard to
avoid, even for experienced C developers. Some issues have been known
for years, while others have been discovered recently in Python.
Working around macro pitfalls makes the macro code harder to read and
to maintain.

Converting macros to functions has multiple advantages:

* Functions don't suffer from macro pitfalls, for example the following
  ones described in `GCC documentation
  <https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/cpp/Macro-Pitfalls.html>`_:

  - Misnesting
  - Operator precedence problems
  - Swallowing the semicolon
  - Duplication of side effects
  - Self-referential macros
  - Argument prescan
  - Newlines in arguments

  Functions don't need the following workarounds for macro
  pitfalls, making them usually easier to read and to maintain than
  similar macro code:

  - Adding parentheses around arguments.
  - Using line continuation characters if the function is written on
    multiple lines.
  - Adding commas to execute multiple expressions.
  - Using ``do { ... } while (0)`` to write multiple statements.

* Argument types and the return type of functions are well defined.
* Debuggers and profilers can retrieve the name of inlined functions.
* Debuggers can put breakpoints on inlined functions.
* Variables have a well-defined scope.

Converting macros and static inline functions to regular functions makes
these regular functions accessible to projects which use Python but
cannot use macros and static inline functions.


Specification
=============

Convert macros to static inline functions
-----------------------------------------

Most macros will be converted to static inline functions.

The following macros will not be converted:

* Object-like macros (i.e. those which don't need parentheses and
  arguments). For example:

  * Empty macros. Example: ``#define Py_HAVE_CONDVAR``.
  * Macros only defining a value, even if a constant with a well defined
    type would be better. Example: ``#define METH_VARARGS 0x0001``.

* Compatibility layer for different C compilers, C language extensions,
  or recent C features.
  Example: ``Py_GCC_ATTRIBUTE()``, ``Py_ALWAYS_INLINE``, ``Py_MEMCPY()``.
* Macros used for definitions rather than behavior.
  Example: ``PyAPI_FUNC``, ``Py_DEPRECATED``, ``Py_PYTHON_H``.
* Macros that need C preprocessor features, like stringification and
  concatenation. Example: ``Py_STRINGIFY()``.
* Macros which cannot be converted to functions. Examples:
  ``Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS`` (contains an unpaired ``}``), ``Py_VISIT``
  (relies on specific variable names), Py_RETURN_RICHCOMPARE (returns
  from the calling function).
* Macros which can be used as an l-value in assignments. This would be
  an incompatible change and is out of the scope of this PEP.
  Example: ``PyBytes_AS_STRING()``.
* Macros which have different return types depending on the code path
  or arguments.


Convert static inline functions to regular functions
----------------------------------------------------

Static inline functions in the public C API may be converted to regular
functions, but only if there is no measurable performance impact of
changing the function.
The performance impact should be measured with benchmarks.


Cast pointer arguments
----------------------

Currently, most macros accepting pointers cast pointer arguments to
their expected types. For example, in Python 3.6, the ``Py_TYPE()``
macro casts its argument to ``PyObject*``:

.. code-block:: c

    #define Py_TYPE(ob) (((PyObject*)(ob))->ob_type)

The ``Py_TYPE()`` macro accepts the ``PyObject*`` type, but also any
pointer types, such as ``PyLongObject*`` and ``PyDictObject*``.

Functions are strongly typed, and can only accept one type of argument.

To avoid compiler errors and warnings in existing code, when a macro is
converted to a function and the macro casts at least one of its arguments
a new macro will be added to keep the cast. The new macro
and the function will have the same name.

Example with the ``Py_TYPE()``
macro converted to a static inline function:

.. code-block:: c

    static inline PyTypeObject* Py_TYPE(PyObject *ob) {
        return ob->ob_type;
    }
    #define Py_TYPE(ob) Py_TYPE((PyObject*)(ob))

The cast is kept for all pointer types, not only ``PyObject*``.
This includes casts to ``void*``: removing a cast to ``void*`` would emit
a new warning if the function is called with a ``const void*`` variable.
For example, the ``PyUnicode_WRITE()`` macro casts its *data* argument to
``void*``, and so it currently accepts ``const void*`` type, even though
it writes into *data*.  This PEP will not change this.


Avoid the cast in the limited C API version 3.11
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The casts will be excluded from the limited C API version 3.11 and newer.
When an API user opts into the new limited API, they must pass the expected
type or perform the cast.

As an example, ``Py_TYPE()`` will be defined like this:

.. code-block:: c

    static inline PyTypeObject* Py_TYPE(PyObject *ob) {
        return ob->ob_type;
    }
    #if !defined(Py_LIMITED_API) || Py_LIMITED_API+0 < 0x030b0000
    #  define Py_TYPE(ob) Py_TYPE((PyObject*)(ob))
    #endif


Return type is not changed
--------------------------

When a macro is converted to a function, its return type must not change
to prevent emitting new compiler warnings.

For example, Python 3.7 changed the return type of ``PyUnicode_AsUTF8()``
from ``char*`` to ``const char*`` (`commit
<https://github.com/python/cpython/commit/2a404b63d48d73bbaa007d89efb7a01048475acd>`__).
The change emitted new compiler warnings when building C extensions
expecting ``char*``. This PEP doesn't change the return type to prevent
this issue.


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

The PEP is designed to avoid C API incompatible changes.

Only C extensions explicitly targeting the limited C API version 3.11
must now pass the expected types to functions: pointer arguments are no
longer cast to the expected types.

Function arguments of pointer types are still cast and return types are
not changed to prevent emitting new compiler warnings.

Macros which can be used as l-value in an assignment are not modified by
this PEP to avoid incompatible changes.


Examples of Macro Pitfalls
==========================

Duplication of side effects
---------------------------

Macros:

.. code-block:: c

    #define PySet_Check(ob) \
        (Py_IS_TYPE(ob, &PySet_Type) \
         || PyType_IsSubtype(Py_TYPE(ob), &PySet_Type))

    #define Py_IS_NAN(X) ((X) != (X))

If the *op* or the *X* argument has a side effect, the side effect is
duplicated: it executed twice by ``PySet_Check()`` and ``Py_IS_NAN()``.

For example, the ``pos++`` argument in the
``PyUnicode_WRITE(kind, data, pos++, ch)`` code has a side effect.
This code is safe because the ``PyUnicode_WRITE()`` macro only uses its
3rd argument once and so does not duplicate ``pos++`` side effect.

Misnesting
----------

Example of the `bpo-43181: Python macros don't shield arguments
<https://bugs.python.org/issue43181>`_. The ``PyObject_TypeCheck()``
macro before it has been fixed:

.. code-block:: c

    #define PyObject_TypeCheck(ob, tp) \
        (Py_IS_TYPE(ob, tp) || PyType_IsSubtype(Py_TYPE(ob), (tp)))

C++ usage example:

.. code-block:: c

    PyObject_TypeCheck(ob, U(f<a,b>(c)))

The preprocessor first expands it:

.. code-block:: c

    (Py_IS_TYPE(ob, f<a,b>(c)) || ...)

C++ ``"<"`` and ``">"`` characters are not treated as brackets by the
preprocessor, so the ``Py_IS_TYPE()`` macro is invoked with 3 arguments:

* ``ob``
* ``f<a``
* ``b>(c)``

The compilation fails with an error on ``Py_IS_TYPE()`` which only takes
2 arguments.

The bug is that the *op* and *tp* arguments of ``PyObject_TypeCheck()``
must be put between parentheses: replace ``Py_IS_TYPE(ob, tp)`` with
``Py_IS_TYPE((ob), (tp))``. In regular C code, these parentheses are
redundant, can be seen as a bug, and so are often forgotten when writing
macros.

To avoid Macro Pitfalls, the ``PyObject_TypeCheck()`` macro has been
converted to a static inline function:
`commit <https://github.com/python/cpython/commit/4bb2a1ebc569eee6f1b46ecef1965a26ae8cb76d>`__.


Examples of hard to read macros
===============================

PyObject_INIT()
---------------

Example showing the usage of commas in a macro which has a return value.

Python 3.7 macro:

.. code-block:: c

    #define PyObject_INIT(op, typeobj) \
        ( Py_TYPE(op) = (typeobj), _Py_NewReference((PyObject *)(op)), (op) )

Python 3.8 function (simplified code):

.. code-block:: c

    static inline PyObject*
    _PyObject_INIT(PyObject *op, PyTypeObject *typeobj)
    {
        Py_TYPE(op) = typeobj;
        _Py_NewReference(op);
        return op;
    }

    #define PyObject_INIT(op, typeobj) \
        _PyObject_INIT(_PyObject_CAST(op), (typeobj))

* The function doesn't need the line continuation character ``"\"``.
* It has an explicit ``"return op;"`` rather than the surprising
  ``", (op)"`` syntax at the end of the macro.
* It uses short statements on multiple lines, rather than being written
  as a single long line.
* Inside the function, the *op* argument has the well defined type
  ``PyObject*`` and so doesn't need casts like ``(PyObject *)(op)``.
* Arguments don't need to be put inside parentheses: use ``typeobj``,
  rather than ``(typeobj)``.

_Py_NewReference()
------------------

Example showing the usage of an ``#ifdef`` inside a macro.

Python 3.7 macro (simplified code):

.. code-block:: c

    #ifdef COUNT_ALLOCS
    #  define _Py_INC_TPALLOCS(OP) inc_count(Py_TYPE(OP))
    #  define _Py_COUNT_ALLOCS_COMMA  ,
    #else
    #  define _Py_INC_TPALLOCS(OP)
    #  define _Py_COUNT_ALLOCS_COMMA
    #endif /* COUNT_ALLOCS */

    #define _Py_NewReference(op) (                   \
        _Py_INC_TPALLOCS(op) _Py_COUNT_ALLOCS_COMMA  \
        Py_REFCNT(op) = 1)

Python 3.8 function (simplified code):

.. code-block:: c

    static inline void _Py_NewReference(PyObject *op)
    {
        _Py_INC_TPALLOCS(op);
        Py_REFCNT(op) = 1;
    }


PyUnicode_READ_CHAR()
---------------------

This macro reuses arguments, and possibly calls ``PyUnicode_KIND`` multiple
times:

.. code-block:: c

    #define PyUnicode_READ_CHAR(unicode, index) \
    (assert(PyUnicode_Check(unicode)),          \
     assert(PyUnicode_IS_READY(unicode)),       \
     (Py_UCS4)                                  \
        (PyUnicode_KIND((unicode)) == PyUnicode_1BYTE_KIND ? \
            ((const Py_UCS1 *)(PyUnicode_DATA((unicode))))[(index)] : \
            (PyUnicode_KIND((unicode)) == PyUnicode_2BYTE_KIND ? \
                ((const Py_UCS2 *)(PyUnicode_DATA((unicode))))[(index)] : \
                ((const Py_UCS4 *)(PyUnicode_DATA((unicode))))[(index)] \
            ) \
        ))

Possible implementation as a static inlined function:

.. code-block:: c

    static inline Py_UCS4
    PyUnicode_READ_CHAR(PyObject *unicode, Py_ssize_t index)
    {
        assert(PyUnicode_Check(unicode));
        assert(PyUnicode_IS_READY(unicode));

        switch (PyUnicode_KIND(unicode)) {
        case PyUnicode_1BYTE_KIND:
            return (Py_UCS4)((const Py_UCS1 *)(PyUnicode_DATA(unicode)))[index];
        case PyUnicode_2BYTE_KIND:
            return (Py_UCS4)((const Py_UCS2 *)(PyUnicode_DATA(unicode)))[index];
        case PyUnicode_4BYTE_KIND:
        default:
            return (Py_UCS4)((const Py_UCS4 *)(PyUnicode_DATA(unicode)))[index];
        }
    }


Macros converted to functions since Python 3.8
==============================================

This is a list of macros already converted to functions between
Python 3.8 and Python 3.11.
Even though some converted macros (like ``Py_INCREF()``) are very
commonly used by C extensions, these conversions did not significantly
impact Python performance and most of them didn't break backward
compatibility.

Macros converted to static inline functions
-------------------------------------------

Python 3.8:

* ``Py_DECREF()``
* ``Py_INCREF()``
* ``Py_XDECREF()``
* ``Py_XINCREF()``
* ``PyObject_INIT()``
* ``PyObject_INIT_VAR()``
* ``_PyObject_GC_UNTRACK()``
* ``_Py_Dealloc()``

Macros converted to regular functions
-------------------------------------

Python 3.9:

* ``PyIndex_Check()``
* ``PyObject_CheckBuffer()``
* ``PyObject_GET_WEAKREFS_LISTPTR()``
* ``PyObject_IS_GC()``
* ``PyObject_NEW()``: alias to ``PyObject_New()``
* ``PyObject_NEW_VAR()``: alias to ``PyObjectVar_New()``

To avoid performance slowdown on Python built without LTO,
private static inline functions have been added to the internal C API:

* ``_PyIndex_Check()``
* ``_PyObject_IS_GC()``
* ``_PyType_HasFeature()``
* ``_PyType_IS_GC()``


Static inline functions converted to regular functions
-------------------------------------------------------

Python 3.11:

* ``PyObject_CallOneArg()``
* ``PyObject_Vectorcall()``
* ``PyVectorcall_Function()``
* ``_PyObject_FastCall()``

To avoid performance slowdown on Python built without LTO, a
private static inline function has been added to the internal C API:

* ``_PyVectorcall_FunctionInline()``


Incompatible changes
--------------------

While other converted macros didn't break the backward compatibility,
there is an exception.

The 3 macros ``Py_REFCNT()``, ``Py_TYPE()`` and ``Py_SIZE()`` have been
converted to static inline functions in Python 3.10 and 3.11 to disallow
using them as l-value in assignment. It is an incompatible change made
on purpose: see `bpo-39573 <https://bugs.python.org/issue39573>`_ for
the rationale.

This PEP does not propose converting macros which can be used as l-value
to avoid introducing new incompatible changes.


Performance concerns and benchmarks
===================================

There have been concerns that converting macros to functions can degrade
performance.

This section explains performance concerns and shows benchmark results
using `PR 29728 <https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/29728>`_, which
replaces the following static inline functions with macros:

* ``PyObject_TypeCheck()``
* ``PyType_Check()``, ``PyType_CheckExact()``
* ``PyType_HasFeature()``
* ``PyVectorcall_NARGS()``
* ``Py_DECREF()``, ``Py_XDECREF()``
* ``Py_INCREF()``, ``Py_XINCREF()``
* ``Py_IS_TYPE()``
* ``Py_NewRef()``
* ``Py_REFCNT()``, ``Py_TYPE()``, ``Py_SIZE()``


The benchmarks were run on Fedora 35 (Linux) with GCC 11 on a laptop with 8
logical CPUs (4 physical CPU cores).


Static inline functions
-----------------------

First of all, converting macros to *static inline* functions has
negligible impact on performance: the measured differences are consistent
with noise due to unrelated factors.

Static inline functions are a new feature in the C99 standard. Modern C
compilers have efficient heuristics to decide if a function should be
inlined or not.

When a C compiler decides to not inline, there is likely a good reason.
For example, inlining would reuse a register which requires to
save/restore the register value on the stack and so increases the stack
memory usage, or be less efficient.

Benchmark of the ``./python -m test -j5`` command on Python built in
release mode with ``gcc -O3``, LTO and PGO:

* Macros (PR 29728): 361 sec +- 1 sec
* Static inline functions (reference): 361 sec +- 1 sec

There is **no significant performance difference** between macros and
static inline functions when static inline functions **are inlined**.


Debug build
-----------

Performance in debug builds *can* suffer when macros are converted to
functions. This is compensated by better debuggability: debuggers can
retreive function names, set breakpoints inside functions, etc.

On Windows, when Python is built in debug mode by Visual Studio, static
inline functions are not inlined.

On other platforms, ``./configure --with-pydebug`` uses the ``-Og`` compiler
option on compilers that support it (including GCC and LLVM Clang).
``-Og`` means “optimize debugging experience”.
Otherwise, the ``-O0`` compiler option is used.
``-O0`` means “disable most optimizations”.

With GCC 11, ``gcc -Og`` can inline static inline functions, whereas
``gcc -O0`` does not inline static inline functions.

Benchmark of the ``./python -m test -j10`` command on Python built in
debug mode with ``gcc -O0`` (that is, compiler optimizations,
including inlining, are explicitly disabled):

* Macros (PR 29728): 345 sec ± 5 sec
* Static inline functions (reference): 360 sec ± 6 sec

Replacing macros with static inline functions makes Python
**1.04x slower** when the compiler **does not inline** static inline
functions.

Note that benchmarks should not be run on a Python debug build.
Moreover, using link-time optimization (LTO) and profile-guided optimization
(PGO) is recommended for best performance and reliable benchmarks.
PGO helps the compiler to decide if functions should be inlined or not.


Force inlining
--------------

The ``Py_ALWAYS_INLINE`` macro can be used to force inlining. This macro
uses ``__attribute__((always_inline))`` with GCC and Clang, and
``__forceinline`` with MSC.

Previous attempts to use ``Py_ALWAYS_INLINE`` didn't show any benefit, and were
abandoned. See for example `bpo-45094 <https://bugs.python.org/issue45094>`_
"Consider using ``__forceinline`` and ``__attribute__((always_inline))`` on
static inline functions (``Py_INCREF``, ``Py_TYPE``) for debug build".

When the ``Py_INCREF()`` macro was converted to a static inline
function in 2018 (`commit
<https://github.com/python/cpython/commit/2aaf0c12041bcaadd7f2cc5a54450eefd7a6ff12>`__),
it was decided not to force inlining. The machine code was analyzed with
multiple C compilers and compiler options, and ``Py_INCREF()`` was always
inlined without having to force inlining. The only case where it was not
inlined was the debug build. See discussion in `bpo-35059
<https://bugs.python.org/issue35059>`_ "Convert ``Py_INCREF()`` and
``PyObject_INIT()`` to inlined functions".


Disabling inlining
------------------

On the other side, the ``Py_NO_INLINE`` macro can be used to disable
inlining.  It can be used to reduce the stack memory usage, or to prevent
inlining on LTO+PGO builds, which generally inline code more aggressively:
see `bpo-33720 <https://bugs.python.org/issue33720>`_. The
``Py_NO_INLINE`` macro uses ``__attribute__ ((noinline))`` with GCC and
Clang, and ``__declspec(noinline)`` with MSC.

This technique is available, though we currently don't know a concrete
function for which it would be useful.
Note that with macros, it is not possible to disable inlining at all.


Rejected Ideas
==============

Keep macros, but fix some macro issues
--------------------------------------

Macros are always "inlined" with any C compiler.

The duplication of side effects can be worked around in the caller of
the macro.

People using macros should be considered "consenting adults". People who
feel unsafe with macros should simply not use them.

These ideas are rejected because macros *are* error prone, and it is too easy
to miss a macro pitfall when writing and reviewing macro code. Moreover, macros
are harder to read and maintain than functions.


Post History
============

python-dev mailing list threads:

* `Version 2 of PEP 670 - Convert macros to functions in the Python C API
  <https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/thread/VM6I3UHVMME6QRSUOYLK6N2OZHP454W6/>`_
  (February 2022)
* `Steering Council reply to PEP 670 -- Convert macros to
  functions in the Python C API
  <https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/message/IJ3IBVY3JDPROKX55YNDT6XZTVTTPGOP/>`_
  (February 2022)
* `PEP 670: Convert macros to functions in the Python C API
  <https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/thread/2GN646CGWGTO6ZHHU7JTA5XWDF4ULM77/>`_
  (October 2021)


References
==========


* `bpo-45490 <https://bugs.python.org/issue45490>`_:
  [C API] PEP 670: Convert macros to functions in the Python C API
  (October 2021).
* `What to do with unsafe macros
  <https://discuss.python.org/t/what-to-do-with-unsafe-macros/7771>`_
  (March 2021).
* `bpo-43502 <https://bugs.python.org/issue43502>`_:
  [C-API] Convert obvious unsafe macros to static inline functions
  (March 2021).


Version History
===============

* Version 2:

  * Stricter policy on not changing argument types and return type.
  * Better explain why pointer arguments require a cast to not emit new
    compiler warnings.
  * Macros which can be used as l-values are no longer modified by the
    PEP.
  * Macros having multiple return types are no longer modified by the
    PEP.
  * Limited C API version 3.11 no longer casts pointer arguments.
  * No longer remove return values of macros "which should not have a
    return value".
  * Add "Macros converted to functions since Python 3.8" section.
  * Add "Benchmark comparing macros and static inline functions"
    section.

* Version 1: First public version


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
