PEP: 571
Title: The manylinux2010 Platform Tag
Version: $Revision$
Last-Modified: $Date$
Author: Mark  Williams <mrw@enotuniq.org>,
        Geoffrey Thomas <geofft@ldpreload.com>,
        Thomas Kluyver <thomas@kluyver.me.uk>
BDFL-Delegate: Nick Coghlan <ncoghlan@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: Distutils SIG <distutils-sig@python.org>
Status: Superseded
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 05-Feb-2018
Post-History:
Superseded-By: 600
Resolution: https://mail.python.org/pipermail/distutils-sig/2018-April/032156.html


Abstract
========

This PEP proposes the creation of a ``manylinux2010`` platform tag to
succeed the ``manylinux1`` tag introduced by PEP 513 [1]_.  It also
proposes that PyPI and ``pip`` both be updated to support uploading,
downloading, and installing ``manylinux2010`` distributions on compatible
platforms.

Rationale
=========

True to its name, the ``manylinux1`` platform tag has made the
installation of binary extension modules a reality on many Linux
systems.  Libraries like ``cryptography`` [2]_ and ``numpy`` [3]_ are
more accessible to Python developers now that their installation on
common architectures does not depend on fragile development
environments and build toolchains.

``manylinux1`` wheels achieve their portability by allowing the
extension modules they contain to link against only a small set of
system-level shared libraries that export versioned symbols old enough
to benefit from backwards-compatibility policies.  Extension modules
in a ``manylinux1`` wheel that rely on ``glibc``, for example, must be
built against version 2.5 or earlier; they may then be run systems
that provide more recent ``glibc`` version that still export the
required symbols at version 2.5.

PEP 513 drew its whitelisted shared libraries and their symbol
versions from CentOS 5.11, which was the oldest supported CentOS
release at the time of its writing.  Unfortunately, CentOS 5.11
reached its end-of-life on March 31st, 2017 with a clear warning
against its continued use. [4]_ No further updates, such as security
patches, will be made available.  This means that its packages will
remain at obsolete versions that hamper the efforts of Python software
packagers who use the ``manylinux1`` Docker image.

CentOS 6 is now the oldest supported CentOS release, and will receive
maintenance updates through November 30th, 2020. [5]_ We propose that
a new PEP 425-style [6]_ platform tag called ``manylinux2010`` be derived
from CentOS 6 and that the ``manylinux`` toolchain, PyPI, and ``pip``
be updated to support it.

This was originally proposed as ``manylinux2``, but the versioning has
been changed to use calendar years (also known as CalVer [23]_). This
makes it easier to define future *manylinux* tags out of order: for
example, a hypothetical ``manylinux2017`` standard may be defined via
a new PEP before ``manylinux2014``, or a ``manylinux2007`` standard
might be defined that targets systems older than this PEP but newer
than ``manylinux1``.

Calendar versioning also gives a rough idea of which Linux
distribution versions support which tag: ``manylinux2010`` will work
on most distribution versions released since 2010. This is only an
approximation, however: the actual compatibility rules are defined
below, and some newer distributions may not meet them.

The ``manylinux2010`` policy
============================

The following criteria determine a ``linux`` wheel's eligibility for
the ``manylinux2010`` tag:

1. The wheel may only contain binary executables and shared objects
   compiled for one of the two architectures supported by CentOS 6:
   x86_64 or i686. [5]_
2. The wheel's binary executables or shared objects may not link
   against externally-provided libraries except those in the following
   whitelist: ::

       libgcc_s.so.1
       libstdc++.so.6
       libm.so.6
       libdl.so.2
       librt.so.1
       libc.so.6
       libnsl.so.1
       libutil.so.1
       libpthread.so.0
       libresolv.so.2
       libX11.so.6
       libXext.so.6
       libXrender.so.1
       libICE.so.6
       libSM.so.6
       libGL.so.1
       libgobject-2.0.so.0
       libgthread-2.0.so.0
       libglib-2.0.so.0

   This list is identical to the externally-provided libraries
   whitelisted for ``manylinux1``, minus ``libncursesw.so.5`` and
   ``libpanelw.so.5``. [7]_ ``libpythonX.Y`` remains ineligible for
   inclusion for the same reasons outlined in PEP 513.

   ``libcrypt.so.1`` was retrospectively removed from the whitelist after
   Fedora 30 was released with ``libcrypt.so.2`` instead.

   On Debian-based systems, these libraries are provided by the packages:

   ============  =======================================================
   Package       Libraries
   ============  =======================================================
   libc6         libdl.so.2, libresolv.so.2, librt.so.1, libc.so.6,
                 libpthread.so.0, libm.so.6, libutil.so.1, libnsl.so.1
   libgcc1       libgcc_s.so.1
   libgl1        libGL.so.1
   libglib2.0-0  libgobject-2.0.so.0, libgthread-2.0.so.0, libglib-2.0.so.0
   libice6       libICE.so.6
   libsm6        libSM.so.6
   libstdc++6    libstdc++.so.6
   libx11-6      libX11.so.6
   libxext6      libXext.so.6
   libxrender1   libXrender.so.1
   ============  =======================================================

   On RPM-based systems, they are provided by these packages:

   ============  =======================================================
   Package       Libraries
   ============  =======================================================
   glib2         libglib-2.0.so.0, libgthread-2.0.so.0, libgobject-2.0.so.0
   glibc         libresolv.so.2, libutil.so.1, libnsl.so.1, librt.so.1,
                 libpthread.so.0, libdl.so.2, libm.so.6, libc.so.6
   libICE        libICE.so.6
   libX11        libX11.so.6
   libXext:      libXext.so.6
   libXrender    libXrender.so.1
   libgcc:       libgcc_s.so.1
   libstdc++     libstdc++.so.6
   mesa          libGL.so.1
   ============  =======================================================

3. If the wheel contains binary executables or shared objects linked
   against any whitelisted libraries that also export versioned
   symbols, they may only depend on the following maximum versions::

       GLIBC_2.12
       CXXABI_1.3.3
       GLIBCXX_3.4.13
       GCC_4.5.0

   As an example, ``manylinux2010`` wheels may include binary artifacts
   that require ``glibc`` symbols at version ``GLIBC_2.4``, because
   this an earlier version than the maximum of ``GLIBC_2.12``.
4. If a wheel is built for any version of CPython 2 or CPython
   versions 3.0 up to and including 3.2, it *must* include a CPython
   ABI tag indicating its Unicode ABI.  A ``manylinux2010`` wheel built
   against Python 2, then, must include either the ``cpy27mu`` tag
   indicating it was built against an interpreter with the UCS-4 ABI
   or the ``cpy27m`` tag indicating an interpreter with the UCS-2
   ABI. [8]_ [9]_
5. A wheel *must not* require the ``PyFPE_jbuf`` symbol.  This is
   achieved by building it against a Python compiled *without* the
   ``--with-fpectl`` ``configure`` flag.

Compilation of Compliant Wheels
===============================

Like ``manylinux1``, the ``auditwheel`` tool adds ``manylinux2010``
platform tags to ``linux`` wheels built by ``pip wheel`` or
``bdist_wheel`` in a ``manylinux2010`` Docker container.

Docker Image
------------

Two ``manylinux2010`` Docker images based on CentOS 6 are
provided for building binary ``linux`` wheels that can reliably be
converted to ``manylinux2010`` wheels.  [10]_ The x86_64 and i686 images comes with a
new compiler suite installed (``gcc``, ``g++``, and ``gfortran``
from ``devtoolset-8``) as well as the latest releases of Python and ``pip``.

Compatibility with kernels that lack ``vsyscall``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A Docker container assumes that its userland is compatible with its
host's kernel.  Unfortunately, an increasingly common kernel
configuration breaks this assumption for x86_64 CentOS 6 Docker
images.

Versions 2.14 and earlier of ``glibc`` require the kernel provide an
archaic system call optimization known as ``vsyscall`` on x86_64. [11]_
To effect the optimization, the kernel maps a read-only page of
frequently-called system calls -- most notably ``time(2)`` -- into
each process at a fixed memory location.  ``glibc`` then invokes these
system calls by dereferencing a function pointer to the appropriate
offset into the ``vsyscall`` page and calling it.  This avoids the
overhead associated with invoking the kernel that affects normal
system call invocation.  ``vsyscall`` has long been deprecated in
favor of an equivalent mechanism known as vDSO, or "virtual dynamic
shared object", in which the kernel instead maps a relocatable virtual
shared object containing the optimized system calls into each
process. [12]_

The ``vsyscall`` page has serious security implications because it
does not participate in address space layout randomization (ASLR).
Its predictable location and contents make it a useful source of
gadgets used in return-oriented programming attacks. [13]_ At the same
time, its elimination breaks the x86_64 ABI, because ``glibc``
versions that depend on ``vsyscall`` suffer from segmentation faults
when attempting to dereference a system call pointer into a
non-existent page.  As a compromise, Linux 3.1 implemented an
"emulated" ``vsyscall`` that reduced the executable code, and thus the
material for ROP gadgets, mapped into the process. [14]_
``vsyscall=emulated`` has been the default configuration in most
distribution's kernels for many years.

Unfortunately, ``vsyscall`` emulation still exposes predictable code
at a reliable memory location, and continues to be useful for
return-oriented programming. [15]_ Because most distributions have now
upgraded to ``glibc`` versions that do not depend on ``vsyscall``,
they are beginning to ship kernels that do not support ``vsyscall`` at
all. [16]_

CentOS 5.11 and 6 both include versions of ``glibc`` that depend on
the ``vsyscall`` page (2.5 and 2.12.2 respectively), so containers
based on either cannot run under kernels provided with many
distribution's upcoming releases. [17]_ If Travis CI, for example,
begins running jobs under
a kernel that does not provide the ``vsyscall`` interface, Python
packagers will not be able to use our Docker images there to build
``manylinux`` wheels. [19]_

We have derived a patch from the ``glibc`` git repository that
backports the removal of all dependencies on ``vsyscall`` to the
version of ``glibc`` included with our ``manylinux2010`` image. [20]_
Rebuilding ``glibc``, and thus building ``manylinux2010`` image itself,
still requires a host kernel that provides the ``vsyscall`` mechanism,
but the resulting image can be both run on hosts that provide it and
those that do not.  Because the ``vsyscall`` interface is an
optimization that is only applied to running processes, the
``manylinux2010`` wheels built with this modified image should be
identical to those built on an unmodified CentOS 6 system.  Also, the
``vsyscall`` problem applies only to x86_64; it is not part of the
i686 ABI.

Auditwheel
----------

The ``auditwheel`` tool has also been updated to produce
``manylinux2010`` wheels. [21]_ Its behavior and purpose are otherwise
unchanged from PEP 513.


Platform Detection for Installers
=================================

Platforms may define a ``manylinux2010_compatible`` boolean attribute on
the ``_manylinux`` module described in PEP 513.  A platform is
considered incompatible with ``manylinux2010`` if the attribute is
``False``.

If the ``_manylinux`` module is not found, or it does not have the attribute
``manylinux2010_compatible``, tools may fall back to checking for glibc. If the
platform has glibc 2.12 or newer, it is assumed to be compatible unless the
``_manylinux`` module says otherwise.

Specifically, the algorithm we propose is::

    def is_manylinux2010_compatible():
        # Only Linux, and only x86-64 / i686
        from distutils.util import get_platform
        if get_platform() not in ["linux-x86_64", "linux-i686"]:
            return False

        # Check for presence of _manylinux module
        try:
            import _manylinux
            return bool(_manylinux.manylinux2010_compatible)
        except (ImportError, AttributeError):
            # Fall through to heuristic check below
            pass

        # Check glibc version. CentOS 6 uses glibc 2.12.
        # PEP 513 contains an implementation of this function.
        return have_compatible_glibc(2, 12)


Backwards compatibility with ``manylinux1`` wheels
==================================================

As explained in PEP 513, the specified symbol versions for
``manylinux1`` whitelisted libraries constitute an *upper bound*.  The
same is true for the symbol versions defined for ``manylinux2010`` in
this PEP.  As a result, ``manylinux1`` wheels are considered
``manylinux2010`` wheels.  A ``pip`` that recognizes the ``manylinux2010``
platform tag will thus install ``manylinux1`` wheels for
``manylinux2010`` platforms -- even when explicitly set -- when no
``manylinux2010`` wheels are available. [22]_

PyPI Support
============

PyPI should permit wheels containing the ``manylinux2010`` platform tag
to be uploaded in the same way that it permits ``manylinux1``.  It
should not attempt to verify the compatibility of ``manylinux2010``
wheels.

Summary of changes to \PEP 571
==============================

The following changes were made to this PEP based on feedback received after
it was approved:

* The maximum version symbol of ``libgcc_s`` was updated from ``GCC_4.3.0``
  to ``GCC_4.5.0`` to address 32-bit Cent OS 6. This doesn't affect x86_64
  because ``libgcc_s`` for x86_64 has no additional symbol from
  ``GCC_4.3.0`` to ``GCC_4.5.0``.

References
==========

.. [1] PEP 513 -- A Platform Tag for Portable Linux Built Distributions
   (https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0513/)
.. [2] pyca/cryptography
   (https://cryptography.io/)
.. [3] numpy
   (https://numpy.org)
.. [4] CentOS 5.11 EOL announcement
   (https://lists.centos.org/pipermail/centos-announce/2017-April/022350.html)
.. [5] CentOS Product Specifications
   (https://web.archive.org/web/20180108090257/https://wiki.centos.org/About/Product)
.. [6] PEP 425 -- Compatibility Tags for Built Distributions
   (https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0425/)
.. [7] ncurses 5 -> 6 transition means we probably need to drop some
   libraries from the manylinux whitelist
   (https://github.com/pypa/manylinux/issues/94)
.. [8] PEP 3149
   https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-3149/
.. [9] SOABI support for Python 2.X and PyPy
   https://github.com/pypa/pip/pull/3075
.. [10] manylinux2010 Docker image
   (https://quay.io/repository/pypa/manylinux2010_x86_64)
.. [11] On vsyscalls and the vDSO
   (https://lwn.net/Articles/446528/)
.. [12] vdso(7)
   (http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/vdso.7.html)
.. [13] Framing Signals -- A Return to Portable Shellcode
   (http://www.cs.vu.nl/~herbertb/papers/srop_sp14.pdf)
.. [14] ChangeLog-3.1
   (https://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/kernel/v3.x/ChangeLog-3.1)
.. [15] Project Zero: Three bypasses and a fix for one of Flash's Vector.<*> mitigations
   (https://googleprojectzero.blogspot.com/2015/08/three-bypasses-and-fix-for-one-of.html)
.. [16] linux: activate CONFIG_LEGACY_VSYSCALL_NONE ?
   (https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=852620)
.. [17] [Wheel-builders] Heads-up re: new kernel configurations breaking the manylinux docker image
   (https://mail.python.org/pipermail/wheel-builders/2016-December/000239.html)
.. [18] No longer used
.. [19] Travis CI
   (https://travis-ci.org/)
.. [20] remove-vsyscall.patch
   https://github.com/markrwilliams/manylinux/commit/e9493d55471d153089df3aafca8cfbcb50fa8093#diff-3eda4130bdba562657f3ec7c1b3f5720
.. [21] auditwheel manylinux2 branch
   (https://github.com/markrwilliams/auditwheel/tree/manylinux2)
.. [22] pip manylinux2 branch
   https://github.com/markrwilliams/pip/commits/manylinux2
.. [23] Calendar Versioning
   http://calver.org/

Copyright
=========

This document has been placed into the public domain.

..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
