PEP: 671
Title: Syntax for late-bound function argument defaults
Author: Chris Angelico <rosuav@gmail.com>
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 24-Oct-2021
Python-Version: 3.11
Post-History: 24-Oct-2021


Abstract
========

Function parameters can have default values which are calculated during
function definition and saved. This proposal introduces a new form of
argument default, defined by an expression to be evaluated at function
call time.


Motivation
==========

Optional function arguments, if omitted, often have some sort of logical
default value. When this value depends on other arguments, or needs to be
reevaluated each function call, there is currently no clean way to state
this in the function header.

Currently-legal idioms for this include::

    # Very common: Use None and replace it in the function
    def bisect_right(a, x, lo=0, hi=None, *, key=None):
        if hi is None:
            hi = len(a)

    # Also well known: Use a unique custom sentinel object
    _USE_GLOBAL_DEFAULT = object()
    def connect(timeout=_USE_GLOBAL_DEFAULT):
        if timeout is _USE_GLOBAL_DEFAULT:
            timeout = default_timeout

    # Unusual: Accept star-args and then validate
    def add_item(item, *optional_target):
        if not optional_target:
            target = []
        else:
            target = optional_target[0]

In each form, ``help(function)`` fails to show the true default value. Each
one has additional problems, too; using ``None`` is only valid if None is not
itself a plausible function parameter, the custom sentinel requires a global
constant; and use of star-args implies that more than one argument could be
given.

Specification
=============

Function default arguments can be defined using the new ``=>`` notation::

    def bisect_right(a, x, lo=0, hi=>len(a), *, key=None):
    def connect(timeout=>default_timeout):
    def add_item(item, target=>[]):
    def format_time(fmt, time_t=>time.time()):

The expression is saved in its source code form for the purpose of inspection,
and bytecode to evaluate it is prepended to the function's body.

Notably, the expression is evaluated in the function's run-time scope, NOT the
scope in which the function was defined (as are early-bound defaults). This
allows the expression to refer to other arguments.

Multiple late-bound arguments are evaluated from left to right, and can refer
to previously-defined values. Order is defined by the function, regardless of
the order in which keyword arguments may be passed. Using names of later
arguments should not be relied upon, and while this MAY work in some Python
implementations, it should be considered dubious::

    def prevref(word="foo", a=>len(word), b=>a//2): # Valid
    def selfref(spam=>spam): # Highly likely to give an error
    def spaminate(sausage=>eggs + 1, eggs=>sausage - 1): # Confusing, may fail
    def frob(n=>len(items), items=[]): # May fail, may succeed

Moreover, even if syntactically and semantically legal, this kind of construct
is highly confusing to other programmers, and should be avoided.


Choice of spelling
------------------

While this document specifies a single syntax ``name=>expression``, alternate
spellings are similarly plausible. Open for consideration are the following:

    def bisect(a, hi=>len(a)):
    def bisect(a, hi:=len(a)):
    def bisect(a, hi?=len(a)):

An alternative reference implementation is under consideration, which would
use this syntax::

    def bisect(a, @hi=len(a)):

Since default arguments behave largely the same whether they're early or late
bound, the syntax is deliberately similar to the existing early-bind syntax.

How to Teach This
=================

Early-bound default arguments should always be taught first, as they are the
simpler and more efficient way to evaluate arguments. Building on them, late
bound arguments are broadly equivalent to code at the top of the function::

    def add_item(item, target=>[]):

    # Equivalent pseudocode:
    def add_item(item, target=<OPTIONAL>):
        if target was omitted: target = []

A simple rule of thumb is: "target=expression" is evaluated when the function
is defined, and "target=>expression" is evaluated when the function is called.
Either way, if the argument is provided at call time, the default is ignored.
While this does not completely explain all the subtleties, it is sufficient to
cover the important distinction here (and the fact that they are similar).


Interaction with other open PEPs
================================

:pep:`661` attempts to solve one of the same problems as this does. It seeks to
improve the documentation of sentinel values in default arguments, where this
proposal seeks to remove the need for sentinels in many common cases. :pep:`661`
is able to improve documentation in arbitrarily complicated functions (it
cites ``traceback.print_exception`` as its primary motivation, which has two
arguments which must both-or-neither be specified); on the other hand, many
of the common cases would no longer need sentinels if the true default could
be defined by the function. Additionally, dedicated sentinel objects can be
used as dictionary lookup keys, where :pep:`671` does not apply.


Interaction with annotations
============================

Annotations go before the default, so in all syntax options, it must be
unambiguous (both to the human and the parser) whether this is an annotation,
a default, or both. The alternate syntax ``target:=expr`` runs the risk of
being misinterpreted as ``target:int=expr`` with the annotation omitted in
error, and may thus mask bugs. The preferred syntax ``target=>expr`` does not
have this problem.


Implementation details
======================

The following relates to the reference implementation, and is not necessarily
part of the specification.

Argument defaults (positional or keyword) have both their values, as already
retained, and an extra piece of information. For positional arguments, the
extras are stored in a tuple in ``__defaults_extra__``, and for keyword-only,
a dict in ``__kwdefaults_extra__``. If this attribute is ``None``, it is
equivalent to having ``None`` for every argument default.

For each parameter with a late-bound default, the special value ``Ellipsis``
is stored as the value placeholder, and the corresponding extra information
needs to be queried. If it is ``None``, then the default is indeed the value
``Ellipsis``; otherwise, it is a descriptive string and the true value is
calculated as the function begins.

When a parameter with a late-bound default is omitted, the function will begin
with the parameter unbound. The function begins by testing for each parameter
with a late-bound default using a new opcode QUERY_FAST/QUERY_DEREF, and if
unbound, evaluates the original expression. This opcode (available only for
fast locals and closure variables) pushes True onto the stack if the given
local has a value, and False if not - meaning that it pushes False if LOAD_FAST
or LOAD_DEREF would raise UnboundLocalError, and True if it would succeed.

Out-of-order variable references are permitted as long as the referent has a
value from an argument or early-bound default.


Costs
-----

When no late-bound argument defaults are used, the following costs should be
all that are incurred:

* Function objects require two additional pointers, which will be NULL
* Compiling code and constructing functions have additional flag checks
* Using ``Ellipsis`` as a default value will require run-time verification
  to see if late-bound defaults exist.

These costs are expected to be minimal (on 64-bit Linux, this increases all
function objects from 152 bytes to 168), with virtually no run-time cost when
late-bound defaults are not used.

Backward incompatibility
------------------------

Where late-bound defaults are not used, behaviour should be identical. Care
should be taken if Ellipsis is found, as it may not represent itself, but
beyond that, tools should see existing code unchanged.

References
==========

https://github.com/rosuav/cpython/tree/pep-671

Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.



..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
