PEP: 580
Title: The C call protocol
Author: Jeroen Demeyer <J.Demeyer@UGent.be>
BDFL-Delegate: Petr Viktorin
Status: Rejected
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 14-Jun-2018
Python-Version: 3.8
Post-History: 20-Jun-2018, 22-Jun-2018, 16-Jul-2018


Rejection Notice
================

This PEP is rejected in favor of PEP 590, which proposes a simpler public
C API for callable objects.


Abstract
========

A new "C call" protocol is proposed.
It is meant for classes representing functions or methods
which need to implement fast calling.
The goal is to generalize all existing optimizations for built-in functions
to arbitrary extension types.

In the reference implementation,
this new protocol is used for the existing classes
``builtin_function_or_method`` and ``method_descriptor``.
However, in the future, more classes may implement it.

**NOTE**: This PEP deals only with the Python/C API,
it does not affect the Python language or standard library.


Motivation
==========

The standard function/method classes ``builtin_function_or_method``
and ``method_descriptor`` allow very efficiently calling C code.
However, they are not subclassable, making them unsuitable for many applications:
for example, they offer limited introspection support
(signatures only using ``__text_signature__``, no arbitrary ``__qualname__``,
no ``inspect.getfile()``).
It's also not possible to store additional data to implement something like
``functools.partial`` or ``functools.lru_cache``.
So, there are many reasons why users would want to implement custom
function/method classes (in a duck-typing sense) in C.
Unfortunately, such custom classes are necessarily slower than
the standard CPython function classes:
the bytecode interpreter has various optimizations
which are specific to instances of
``builtin_function_or_method``, ``method_descriptor``, ``method`` and ``function``.

This PEP also allows to simplify existing code:
checks for ``builtin_function_or_method`` and ``method_descriptor``
could be replaced by simply checking for and using the C call protocol.
Future PEPs may implement the C call protocol for more classes,
enabling even further simplifications.

We also design the C call protocol such that it can easily
be extended with new features in the future.

For more background and motivation, see PEP 579.


Overview
========

Currently, CPython has multiple optimizations for fast calling
for a few specific function classes.
A good example is the implementation of the opcode ``CALL_FUNCTION``,
which has the following structure
(`see the actual code <https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/7a2368063f25746d4008a74aca0dc0b82f86ff7b/Python/ceval.c#L4592>`_)::

    if (PyCFunction_Check(func)) {
        return _PyCFunction_FastCallKeywords(func, stack, nargs, kwnames);
    }
    else if (Py_TYPE(func) == &PyMethodDescr_Type) {
        return _PyMethodDescr_FastCallKeywords(func, stack, nargs, kwnames);
    }
    else {
        if (PyMethod_Check(func) && PyMethod_GET_SELF(func) != NULL) {
            /* ... */
        }
        if (PyFunction_Check(func)) {
            return _PyFunction_FastCallKeywords(func, stack, nargs, kwnames);
        }
        else {
            return _PyObject_FastCallKeywords(func, stack, nargs, kwnames);
        }
    }

Calling instances of these special-cased classes
using the ``tp_call`` slot is slower than using the optimizations.
The basic idea of this PEP is to enable such optimizations
for user C code, both as caller and as callee.

The existing class ``builtin_function_or_method`` and a few others
use a ``PyMethodDef`` structure for describing the underlying C function and its signature.
The first concrete change is that this is replaced by a new structure ``PyCCallDef``.
This stores some of the same information as a ``PyMethodDef``,
but with one important addition:
the "parent" of the function (the class or module where it is defined).
Note that ``PyMethodDef`` arrays are still used to construct
functions/methods but no longer for calling them.

Second, we want that every class can use such a ``PyCCallDef`` for optimizing calls,
so the ``PyTypeObject`` structure gains a ``tp_ccalloffset`` field
giving an offset to a ``PyCCallDef *`` in the object structure
and a flag ``Py_TPFLAGS_HAVE_CCALL`` indicating that ``tp_ccalloffset`` is valid.

Third, since we want to deal efficiently with unbound and bound methods too
(as opposed to only plain functions), we need to handle ``__self__`` in the protocol:
after the ``PyCCallDef *`` in the object structure,
there is a ``PyObject *self`` field.
These two fields together are referred to as a ``PyCCallRoot`` structure.

The new protocol for efficiently calling objects using these new structures
is called the "C call protocol".

**NOTE**: In this PEP, the phrases "unbound method" and "bound method"
refer to generic behavior, not to specific classes.
For example, an unbound method gets turned into a bound method
after applying ``__get__``.


New data structures
===================

The ``PyTypeObject`` structure gains a new field ``Py_ssize_t tp_ccalloffset``
and a new flag ``Py_TPFLAGS_HAVE_CCALL``.
If this flag is set, then ``tp_ccalloffset`` is assumed to be a valid
offset inside the object structure (similar to ``tp_dictoffset`` and ``tp_weaklistoffset``).
It must be a strictly positive integer.
At that offset, a ``PyCCallRoot`` structure appears::

    typedef struct {
        const PyCCallDef *cr_ccall;
        PyObject         *cr_self;  /* __self__ argument for methods */
    } PyCCallRoot;

The ``PyCCallDef`` structure contains everything needed to describe how
the function can be called::

    typedef struct {
        uint32_t  cc_flags;
        PyCFunc   cc_func;    /* C function to call */
        PyObject *cc_parent;  /* class or module */
    } PyCCallDef;

The reason for putting ``__self__`` outside of ``PyCCallDef``
is that ``PyCCallDef`` is not meant to be changed after creating the function.
A single ``PyCCallDef`` can be shared
by an unbound method and multiple bound methods.
This wouldn't work if we would put ``__self__`` inside that structure.

**NOTE**: unlike ``tp_dictoffset`` we do not allow negative numbers
for ``tp_ccalloffset`` to mean counting from the end.
There does not seem to be a use case for it and it would only complicate
the implementation.

Parent
------

The ``cc_parent`` field (accessed for example by a ``__parent__``
or ``__objclass__`` descriptor from Python code) can be any Python
object, or NULL.
Custom classes are free to set ``cc_parent`` to whatever they want.
It is only used by the C call protocol if the
``CCALL_OBJCLASS`` flag is set.

For methods of extension types, ``cc_parent`` points to the class
that defines the method (which may be a superclass of ``type(self)``).
This is currently non-trivial to retrieve from a method's code.
In the future, this can be used to access the module state via
the defining class. See the rationale of PEP 573 for details.

When the flag ``CCALL_OBJCLASS`` is set (as it will be for methods of
extension types), ``cc_parent`` is used for type checks like the following::

    >>> list.append({}, "x")
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
    TypeError: descriptor 'append' requires a 'list' object but received a 'dict'

For functions of modules, ``cc_parent`` is set to the module.
Currently, this is exactly the same as ``__self__``.
However, using ``__self__`` for the module is a quirk of the current implementation:
in the future, we want to allow functions which use ``__self__``
in the normal way, for implementing methods.
Such functions can still use ``cc_parent`` instead to refer to the module.

The parent would also typically be used to implement ``__qualname__``.
The new C API function ``PyCCall_GenericGetQualname()`` does exactly that.

Using tp_print
--------------

We propose to replace the existing unused field ``tp_print``
by ``tp_ccalloffset``.
Since ``Py_TPFLAGS_HAVE_CCALL`` would *not* be added to
``Py_TPFLAGS_DEFAULT``, this ensures full backwards compatibility for
existing extension modules setting ``tp_print``.
It also means that we can require that ``tp_ccalloffset`` is a valid
offset when ``Py_TPFLAGS_HAVE_CCALL`` is specified:
we do not need to check ``tp_ccalloffset != 0``.
In future Python versions, we may decide that ``tp_print``
becomes ``tp_ccalloffset`` unconditionally,
drop the ``Py_TPFLAGS_HAVE_CCALL`` flag and instead check for
``tp_ccalloffset != 0``.

**NOTE**: the exact layout of ``PyTypeObject`` is not part of the stable ABI ([#pep384]_).
Therefore, changing the ``tp_print`` field from a ``printfunc`` (a function pointer)
to a ``Py_ssize_t`` should not be a problem,
even if this changes the memory layout of the ``PyTypeObject`` structure.
Moreover, on all systems for which binaries are commonly built
(Windows, Linux, macOS),
the size of ``printfunc`` and ``Py_ssize_t`` are the same,
so the issue of binary compatibility will not come up anyway.


The C call protocol
===================

We say that a class implements the C call protocol
if it has the ``Py_TPFLAGS_HAVE_CCALL`` flag set
(as explained above, it must then set ``tp_ccalloffset > 0``).
Such a class must implement ``__call__`` as described in this section
(in practice, this just means setting ``tp_call`` to ``PyCCall_Call``).

The ``cc_func`` field is a C function pointer,
which plays the same role as the existing ``ml_meth`` field of ``PyMethodDef``.
Its precise signature depends on flags.
The subset of flags influencing the signature of ``cc_func``
is given by the bitmask ``CCALL_SIGNATURE``.
Below are the possible values for ``cc_flags & CCALL_SIGNATURE``
together with the arguments that the C function takes.
The return value is always ``PyObject *``.
The following are analogous to the existing ``PyMethodDef``
signature flags:

- ``CCALL_VARARGS``:
  ``cc_func(PyObject *self, PyObject *args)``

- ``CCALL_VARARGS | CCALL_KEYWORDS``:
  ``cc_func(PyObject *self, PyObject *args, PyObject *kwds)``
  (``kwds`` is either ``NULL`` or a dict; this dict must not be modified by the callee)

- ``CCALL_FASTCALL``:
  ``cc_func(PyObject *self, PyObject *const *args, Py_ssize_t nargs)``

- ``CCALL_FASTCALL | CCALL_KEYWORDS``:
  ``cc_func(PyObject *self, PyObject *const *args, Py_ssize_t nargs, PyObject *kwnames)``
  (``kwnames`` is either ``NULL`` or a non-empty tuple of keyword names)

- ``CCALL_NOARGS``:
  ``cc_func(PyObject *self, PyObject *unused)`` (second argument is always ``NULL``)

- ``CCALL_O``:
  ``cc_func(PyObject *self, PyObject *arg)``

The flag ``CCALL_DEFARG`` may be combined with any of these.
If so, the C function takes an additional argument
as first argument before ``self``,
namely a const pointer to the ``PyCCallDef`` structure used for this call.
For example, we have the following signature:

- ``CCALL_DEFARG | CCALL_VARARGS``:
  ``cc_func(const PyCCallDef *def, PyObject *self, PyObject *args)``

One exception is ``CCALL_DEFARG | CCALL_NOARGS``:
the ``unused`` argument is dropped, so the signature becomes

- ``CCALL_DEFARG | CCALL_NOARGS``:
  ``cc_func(const PyCCallDef *def, PyObject *self)``

**NOTE**: unlike the existing ``METH_...`` flags,
the ``CCALL_...`` constants do not necessarily represent single bits.
So checking ``if (cc_flags & CCALL_VARARGS)`` is not a valid way
for checking the signature.
There are also no guarantees of binary compatibility for these flags
between Python versions.
This allows the implementation to choose the most efficient
numerical values of the flags.
In the reference implementation,
the legal values for ``cc_flags & CCALL_SIGNATURE`` form exactly the interval [0, …, 11].
This means that the compiler can easily
optimize a ``switch`` statement for those cases using a computed goto.

Checking __objclass__
---------------------

If the ``CCALL_OBJCLASS`` flag is set and if ``cr_self`` is NULL
(this is the case for unbound methods of extension types),
then a type check is done:
the function must be called with at least one positional argument
and the first (typically called ``self``) must be an instance of
``cc_parent`` (which must be a class).
If not, a ``TypeError`` is raised.

Self slicing
------------

If ``cr_self`` is not NULL or if the flag ``CCALL_SELFARG``
is not set in ``cc_flags``, then the argument passed as ``self``
is simply ``cr_self``.

If ``cr_self`` is NULL and the flag ``CCALL_SELFARG`` is set,
then the first positional argument is removed from
``args`` and instead passed as ``self`` argument to the C function.
Effectively, the first positional argument is treated as ``__self__``.
If there are no positional arguments, ``TypeError`` is raised.

This process is called "self slicing" and a function is said to have self
slicing if ``cr_self`` is NULL and ``CCALL_SELFARG`` is set.

Note that a ``CCALL_NOARGS`` function with self slicing effectively has
one argument, namely ``self``.
Analogously, a ``CCALL_O`` function with self slicing has two arguments.

Descriptor behavior
-------------------

Classes supporting the C call protocol
must implement the descriptor protocol in a specific way.

This is required for an efficient implementation of bound methods:
if other code can make assumptions on what ``__get__`` does,
it enables optimizations which would not be possible otherwise.
In particular, we want to allow sharing
the ``PyCCallDef`` structure between bound and unbound methods.
We also need a correct implementation of ``_PyObject_GetMethod``
which is used by the ``LOAD_METHOD``/``CALL_METHOD`` optimization.

First of all, if ``func`` supports the C call protocol,
then ``func.__set__`` and ``func.__delete__`` must not be implemented.

Second, ``func.__get__`` must behave as follows:

- If ``cr_self`` is not NULL, then ``__get__`` must be a no-op
  in the sense that ``func.__get__(obj, cls)(*args, **kwds)``
  behaves exactly the same as ``func(*args, **kwds)``.
  It is also allowed for ``__get__`` to be not implemented at all.

- If ``cr_self`` is NULL, then ``func.__get__(obj, cls)(*args, **kwds)``
  (with ``obj`` not None)
  must be equivalent to ``func(obj, *args, **kwds)``.
  In particular, ``__get__`` must be implemented in this case.
  This is unrelated to `self slicing`_: ``obj`` may be passed
  as ``self`` argument to the C function or it may be the first positional argument.

- If ``cr_self`` is NULL, then ``func.__get__(None, cls)(*args, **kwds)``
  must be equivalent to ``func(*args, **kwds)``.

There are no restrictions on the object ``func.__get__(obj, cls)``.
The latter is not required to implement the C call protocol for example.
We only specify what ``func.__get__(obj, cls).__call__`` does.

For classes that do not care about ``__self__`` and ``__get__`` at all,
the easiest solution is to assign ``cr_self = Py_None``
(or any other non-NULL value).

The __name__ attribute
----------------------

The C call protocol requires that the function has a ``__name__``
attribute which is of type ``str`` (not a subclass).

Furthermore, the object returned by ``__name__`` must be stored somewhere;
it cannot be a temporary object.
This is required because ``PyEval_GetFuncName``
uses a borrowed reference to the ``__name__`` attribute
(see also [#badcapi]_).

Generic API functions
---------------------

This section lists the new public API functions or macros
dealing with the C call protocol.

- ``int PyCCall_Check(PyObject *op)``:
  return true if ``op`` implements the C call protocol.

All the functions and macros below
apply to any instance supporting the C call protocol.
In other words, ``PyCCall_Check(func)`` must be true.

- ``PyObject *PyCCall_Call(PyObject *func, PyObject *args, PyObject *kwds)``:
  call ``func`` with positional arguments ``args``
  and keyword arguments ``kwds`` (``kwds`` may be NULL).
  This function is meant to be put in the ``tp_call`` slot.

- ``PyObject *PyCCall_FastCall(PyObject *func, PyObject *const *args, Py_ssize_t nargs, PyObject *kwds)``:
  call ``func`` with ``nargs`` positional arguments given by ``args[0]``, …, ``args[nargs-1]``.
  The parameter ``kwds`` can be NULL (no keyword arguments),
  a dict with ``name:value`` items or a tuple with keyword names.
  In the latter case, the keyword values are stored in the ``args``
  array, starting at ``args[nargs]``.

Macros to access the ``PyCCallRoot`` and ``PyCCallDef`` structures:

- ``const PyCCallRoot *PyCCall_CCALLROOT(PyObject *func)``:
  pointer to the ``PyCCallRoot`` structure inside ``func``.

- ``const PyCCallDef *PyCCall_CCALLDEF(PyObject *func)``:
  shorthand for ``PyCCall_CCALLROOT(func)->cr_ccall``.

- ``uint32_t PyCCall_FLAGS(PyObject *func)``:
  shorthand for ``PyCCall_CCALLROOT(func)->cr_ccall->cc_flags``.

- ``PyObject *PyCCall_SELF(PyOject *func)``:
  shorthand for ``PyCCall_CCALLROOT(func)->cr_self``.

Generic getters, meant to be put into the ``tp_getset`` array:

- ``PyObject *PyCCall_GenericGetParent(PyObject *func, void *closure)``:
  return ``cc_parent``.
  Raise ``AttributeError`` if ``cc_parent`` is NULL.

- ``PyObject *PyCCall_GenericGetQualname(PyObject *func, void *closure)``:
  return a string suitable for using as ``__qualname__``.
  This uses the ``__qualname__`` of ``cc_parent`` if possible.
  It also uses the ``__name__`` attribute.

Profiling
---------

The profiling events
``c_call``, ``c_return`` and ``c_exception`` are only generated
when calling actual instances of ``builtin_function_or_method`` or ``method_descriptor``.
This is done for simplicity and also for backwards compatibility
(such that the profile function does not receive objects that it does not recognize).
In a future PEP, we may extend C-level profiling to arbitrary classes
implementing the C call protocol.


Changes to built-in functions and methods
=========================================

The reference implementation of this PEP changes
the existing classes ``builtin_function_or_method`` and ``method_descriptor``
to use the C call protocol.
In fact, those two classes are almost merged:
the implementation becomes very similar, but they remain separate classes
(mostly for backwards compatibility).
The ``PyCCallDef`` structure is simply stored
as part of the object structure.
Both classes use ``PyCFunctionObject`` as object structure.
This is the new layout for both classes:

.. _PyCFunctionObject:

::

    typedef struct {
        PyObject_HEAD
        PyCCallDef  *m_ccall;
        PyObject    *m_self;         /* Passed as 'self' arg to the C function */
        PyCCallDef   _ccalldef;      /* Storage for m_ccall */
        PyObject    *m_name;         /* __name__; str object (not NULL) */
        PyObject    *m_module;       /* __module__; can be anything */
        const char  *m_doc;          /* __text_signature__ and __doc__ */
        PyObject    *m_weakreflist;  /* List of weak references */
    } PyCFunctionObject;

For functions of a module and for unbound methods of extension types,
``m_ccall`` points to the ``_ccalldef`` field.
For bound methods, ``m_ccall`` points to the ``PyCCallDef``
of the unbound method.

**NOTE**: the new layout of ``method_descriptor`` changes it
such that it no longer starts with ``PyDescr_COMMON``.
This is purely an implementation detail and it should cause few (if any)
compatibility problems.

C API functions
---------------

The following function is added (also to the stable ABI [#pep384]_):

- ``PyObject * PyCFunction_ClsNew(PyTypeObject *cls, PyMethodDef *ml, PyObject *self, PyObject *module, PyObject *parent)``:
  create a new object with object structure ``PyCFunctionObject`` and class ``cls``.
  The entries of the ``PyMethodDef`` structure are used to construct
  the new object, but the pointer to the ``PyMethodDef`` structure
  is not stored.
  The flags for the C call protocol are automatically determined in terms
  of ``ml->ml_flags``, ``self`` and ``parent``.

The existing functions ``PyCFunction_New``, ``PyCFunction_NewEx`` and
``PyDescr_NewMethod`` are implemented in terms of ``PyCFunction_ClsNew``.

The undocumented functions ``PyCFunction_GetFlags``
and ``PyCFunction_GET_FLAGS`` are deprecated.
They are still artificially supported by storing the original ``METH_...``
flags in a bitfield inside ``cc_flags``.
Despite the fact that ``PyCFunction_GetFlags`` is technically
part of the stable ABI [#pep384]_,
it is highly unlikely to be used that way:
first of all, it is not even documented.
Second, the flag ``METH_FASTCALL``
is not part of the stable ABI but it is very common
(because of Argument Clinic).
So, if one cannot support ``METH_FASTCALL``,
it is hard to imagine a use case for ``PyCFunction_GetFlags``.
The fact that ``PyCFunction_GET_FLAGS`` and ``PyCFunction_GetFlags``
are not used at all by CPython outside of ``Objects/call.c``
further shows that these functions are not particularly useful.


Inheritance
===========

Extension types inherit the type flag ``Py_TPFLAGS_HAVE_CCALL``
and the value ``tp_ccalloffset`` from the base class,
provided that they implement ``tp_call`` and ``tp_descr_get``
the same way as the base class.
Heap types never inherit the C call protocol because
that would not be safe (heap types can be changed dynamically).


Performance
===========

This PEP should not impact the performance of existing code
(in the positive or negative sense).
It is meant to allow efficient new code to be written,
not to make existing code faster.

Here are a few pointers to the ``python-dev`` mailing list where
performance improvements are discussed:

- https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2018-July/154571.html

- https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2018-July/154740.html

- https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2018-July/154775.html

- https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2019-April/156954.html


Stable ABI
==========

The function ``PyCFunction_ClsNew`` is added to the stable ABI [#pep384]_.

None of the functions, structures or constants dealing with the C call protocol
are added to the stable ABI.

There are two reasons for this:
first of all, the most useful feature of the C call protocol is probably the
``METH_FASTCALL`` calling convention.
Given that this is not even part of the public API (see also PEP 579, issue 6),
it would be strange to add anything else from the C call protocol
to the stable ABI.

Second, we want the C call protocol to be extensible in the future.
By not adding anything to the stable ABI,
we are free to do that without restrictions.


Backwards compatibility
=======================

There is no difference at all for the Python interface,
nor for the documented C API
(in the sense that all functions remain supported with the same functionality).

The only potential breakage is with C code
which accesses the internals of ``PyCFunctionObject`` and ``PyMethodDescrObject``.
We expect very few problems because of this.


Rationale
=========

Why is this better than PEP 575?
--------------------------------

One of the major complaints of PEP 575 was that is was coupling
functionality (the calling and introspection protocol)
with the class hierarchy:
a class could only benefit from the new features
if it was a subclass of ``base_function``.
It may be difficult for existing classes to do that
because they may have other constraints on the layout of the C object structure,
coming from an existing base class or implementation details.
For example, ``functools.lru_cache`` cannot implement PEP 575 as-is.

It also complicated the implementation precisely because changes
were needed both in the implementation details and in the class hierarchy.

The current PEP does not have these problems.

Why store the function pointer in the instance?
-----------------------------------------------

The actual information needed for calling an object
is stored in the instance (in the ``PyCCallDef`` structure)
instead of the class.
This is different from the ``tp_call`` slot or earlier attempts
at implementing a ``tp_fastcall`` slot [#bpo29259]_.

The main use case is built-in functions and methods.
For those, the C function to be called does depend on the instance.

Note that the current protocol makes it easy to support the case
where the same C function is called for all instances:
just use a single static ``PyCCallDef`` structure for every instance.

Why CCALL_OBJCLASS?
-------------------

The flag ``CCALL_OBJCLASS`` is meant to support various cases
where the class of a ``self`` argument must be checked, such as::

    >>> list.append({}, None)
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
    TypeError: append() requires a 'list' object but received a 'dict'

    >>> list.__len__({})
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
    TypeError: descriptor '__len__' requires a 'list' object but received a 'dict'

    >>> float.__dict__["fromhex"](list, "0xff")
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
    TypeError: descriptor 'fromhex' for type 'float' doesn't apply to type 'list'

In the reference implementation, only the first of these uses the new code.
The other examples show that these kind of checks appear
in multiple places, so it makes sense to add generic support for them.

Why CCALL_SELFARG?
------------------

The flag ``CCALL_SELFARG`` and the concept of self slicing
are needed to support methods:
the C function should not care
whether it is called as unbound method or as bound method.
In both cases, there should be a ``self`` argument
and this is simply the first positional argument of an unbound method call.

For example, ``list.append`` is a ``METH_O`` method.
Both the calls ``list.append([], 42)`` and ``[].append(42)`` should
translate to the C call ``list_append([], 42)``.

Thanks to the proposed C call protocol, we can support this in such a way
that both the unbound and the bound method share a ``PyCCallDef``
structure (with the ``CCALL_SELFARG`` flag set).

So, ``CCALL_SELFARG`` has two advantages:
there is no extra layer of indirection for calling methods
and constructing bound methods does not require setting up a ``PyCCallDef`` structure.

Another minor advantage is that we could
make the error messages for a wrong call signature
more uniform between Python methods and built-in methods.
In the following example, Python is undecided whether
a method takes 1 or 2 arguments::

    >>> class List(list):
    ...     def myappend(self, item):
    ...         self.append(item)
    >>> List().myappend(1, 2)
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
    TypeError: myappend() takes 2 positional arguments but 3 were given
    >>> List().append(1, 2)
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
    TypeError: append() takes exactly one argument (2 given)

It is currently impossible for ``PyCFunction_Call``
to know the actual number of user-visible arguments
since it cannot distinguish at runtime between
a function (without ``self`` argument) and a bound method (with ``self`` argument).
The ``CCALL_SELFARG`` flag makes this difference explicit.

Why CCALL_DEFARG?
-----------------

The flag ``CCALL_DEFARG`` gives the callee access to the ``PyCCallDef *``.
There are various use cases for this:

1. The callee can use the ``cc_parent`` field, which is useful for PEP 573.

2. Applications are free to extend the ``PyCCallDef`` structure with user-defined
   fields, which can then be accessed analogously.

3. In the case where the ``PyCCallDef`` structure
   is part of the object structure
   (this is true for example for `PyCFunctionObject`_),
   an appropriate offset can be subtracted from the ``PyCCallDef`` pointer
   to get a pointer to the callable object defining that ``PyCCallDef``.

An earlier version of this PEP defined a flag ``CCALL_FUNCARG``
instead of ``CCALL_DEFARG`` which would pass the callable object
to the callee.
This had similar use cases, but there was some ambiguity for
bound methods: should the "callable object" be the bound method
object or the original function wrapped by the method?
By passing the ``PyCCallDef *`` instead, this ambiguity is gone
since the bound method uses the ``PyCCallDef *`` from the wrapped function.

Replacing tp_print
------------------

We repurpose ``tp_print`` as ``tp_ccalloffset`` because this makes
it easier for external projects to backport the C call protocol
to earlier Python versions.
In particular, the Cython project has shown interest in doing that
(see https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2018-June/153927.html).


Alternative suggestions
=======================

PEP 576 is an alternative approach to solving the same problem as this PEP.
See https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2018-July/154238.html
for comments on the difference between PEP 576 and PEP 580.


Discussion
==========

Links to threads on the ``python-dev`` mailing list
where this PEP has been discussed:

- https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2018-June/153938.html

- https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2018-June/153984.html

- https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2018-July/154238.html

- https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2018-July/154470.html

- https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2018-July/154571.html

- https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2018-September/155166.html

- https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2018-October/155403.html

- https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2019-March/156853.html

- https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2019-March/156879.html


Reference implementation
========================

The reference implementation can be found at
https://github.com/jdemeyer/cpython/tree/pep580

For an example of using the C call protocol,
the following branch implements ``functools.lru_cache`` using PEP 580:
https://github.com/jdemeyer/cpython/tree/lru580


References
==========

.. [#pep384] Löwis, PEP 384 – Defining a Stable ABI,
             https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0384/

.. [#bpo29259] Add tp_fastcall to PyTypeObject: support FASTCALL calling convention for all callable objects,
               https://bugs.python.org/issue29259

.. [#badcapi] Bad C API,
              https://pythoncapi.readthedocs.io/bad_api.html#bad-c-api

Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.



..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
