PEP: 8102
Title: 2021 Term steering council election
Version: $Revision$
Last-Modified: $Date$
Author: Ewa Jodlowska <ewa@python.org>, Ee W. Durbin III <ee@python.org>, Joe Carey <joe@python.org>
Sponsor: Brett Cannon <brett@python.org>
Status: Active
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 29-Oct-2020


Abstract
========

This document describes the schedule and other details of the December
2020 election for the Python steering council, as specified in
PEP 13. This is the steering council election for the 2021 term.


Election Administration
=======================

The steering council appointed the
`Python Software Foundation <https://www.python.org/psf-landing/>`__
Director of Infrastructure, Ee W. Durbin III,
and Accouting Manager, Joe Carey, to coadminster the election.

`Python Software Foundation <https://www.python.org/psf-landing/>`__
Executive Director, Ewa Jodlowska, will communicate announcements
regarding the election.


Schedule
========

There will be a two-week nomination period, followed by a two-week
vote.

The nomination period was: November 1, 2020 through November 16, 2020 12:00 UTC
(The end of November 15, 2020 `Anywhere on Earth
<https://www.ieee802.org/16/aoe.html>`_). As announced on `python-committers
<https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-committers@python.org/thread/JHYSU6FEYM3A5AZXSICO5OE3VAWDPGEJ/>`_,
and took place on `discuss.python.org <https://discuss.python.org/c/core-dev/steering-council-nominations>`_.

The voting period is: December 1, 2020 12:00 UTC through December 16, 2020
12:00 UTC (The end of December 15, 2020 `Anywhere on Earth
<https://www.ieee802.org/16/aoe.html>`_).


Candidates
==========

Candidates must be nominated by a core team member. If the candidate
is a core team member, they may nominate themselves.

Nominees (in alphabetical order):

- `Brett Cannon <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-brett-cannon-2021-term/5633>`_
- `Matt Harrison <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-matt-harrison-2021-term/5645>`_
- `Christian Heimes <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-christian-heimes-2021-term/5628>`_
- `Raymond Hettinger <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-raymond-hettinger-2021-term/5731>`_
- `David Mertz <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-david-mertz-2021-term/5718>`_
- `Pablo Galindo Salgado <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-pablo-galindo-salgado-2021-term/5720>`_
- `Barry Warsaw <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-barry-warsaw-2021-term/5742>`_
- `Carol Willing <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-carol-willing-2021-term/5763>`_
- `Thomas Wouters <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-thomas-wouters-2021-term/5678>`_
- `Mariatta <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-mariatta-2021-term/5765>`_

Withdrawn nominations:

- None

Voter Roll
==========

All active Python core team members are eligible to vote. Active status
is determined as described in `PEP 13 <https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0013/#membership>`_
and implemented via the software at `python/voters <https://github.com/python/voters>`_ [1]_.

Ballots will be distributed based on the `The Python Voter Roll for this
election
<https://github.com/python/voters/blob/master/voter-files/>`_
[1]_.

While this file is not public as it contains private email addresses, the
`Complete Voter Roll`_ by name will be made available when the roll is
created.

Election Implementation
=======================

The election will be conducted using the `Helios Voting Service
<https://heliosvoting.org>`__.


Configuration
-------------

Short name: ``2021-python-steering-council``

Name: ``2021 Python Steering Council Election``

Description: ``Election for the Python steering council, as specified in PEP 13. This is steering council election for the 2021 term.``

type: ``Election``

Use voter aliases: ``[X]``

Randomize answer order: ``[X]``

Private: ``[X]``

Help Email Address: ``psf-election@python.org``

Voting starts at: ``December 1, 2020 00:00 UTC``

Voting ends at: ``December 16, 2020 12:00 UTC``

This will create an election in which:

* Voting is not open to the public, only those on the `Voter Roll`_ may
  participate. Ballots will be emailed when voting starts.
* Candidates are presented in random order, to help avoid bias.
* Voter identities and ballots are protected against cryptographic advances.

Questions
---------

Question 1
~~~~~~~~~~

Select between ``0`` and ``- (approval)`` answers. Result Type: ``absolute``

Question: ``Select candidates for the Python Steering Council``

Answer #1 - #N: ``Candidates from Candidates_ Section``



Results
=======

Of 91 eligible voters, 74 cast ballots.

The top five vote-getters are:

* Barry Warsaw
* Brett Cannon
* Carol Willing
* Pablo Galindo Salgado
* Thomas Wouters

No conflict of interest as defined in PEP 13 were observed.

The full vote counts are as follows:

+-----------------------+----------------+
| Candidate             | Votes Received |
+=======================+================+
| Pablo Galindo Salgado | 59             |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| Carol Willing         | 57             |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| Barry Warsaw          | 56             |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| Brett Cannon          | 54             |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| Thomas Wouters        | 52             |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| Christian Heimes      | 43             |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| Mariatta              | 42             |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| Raymond Hettinger     | 31             |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| David Mertz           | 28             |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| Matt Harrison         | 15             |
+-----------------------+----------------+


Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.


Complete Voter Roll
===================

Active Python core developers
-----------------------------

::

	Abhilash Raj
	Alex Gaynor
	Alex Martelli
	Alexander Belopolsky
	Andrew Kuchling
	Andrew Svetlov
	Antoine Pitrou
	Barry Warsaw
	Batuhan Taskaya
	Benjamin Peterson
	Berker Peksağ
	Brandt Bucher
	Brett Cannon
	Brian Curtin
	Brian Quinlan
	Carol Willing
	Cheryl Sabella
	Chris Jerdonek
	Chris Withers
	Christian Heimes
	Christian Tismer
	Davin Potts
	Dino Viehland
	Donald Stufft
	Dong-hee Na
	Emily Morehouse
	Éric Araujo
	Eric Snow
	Eric V. Smith
	Ethan Furman
	Ezio Melotti
	Facundo Batista
	Fred Drake
	Georg Brandl
	Giampaolo Rodolà
	Gregory P. Smith
	Guido van Rossum
	Hynek Schlawack
	Inada Naoki
	Ivan Levkivskyi
	Jack Jansen
	Jason R. Coombs
	Jeremy Kloth
	Jesús Cea
	Joannah Nanjekye
	Julien Palard
	Karthikeyan Singaravelan
	Kurt B. Kaiser
	Kushal Das
	Kyle Stanley
	Larry Hastings
	Lisa Roach
	Łukasz Langa
	Lysandros Nikolaou
	Marc-André Lemburg
	Mariatta
	Mark Dickinson
	Mark Hammond
	Mark Shannon
	Matthias Klose
	Michael Foord
	Nathaniel J. Smith
	Ned Deily
	Neil Schemenauer
	Nick Coghlan
	Pablo Galindo
	Paul Ganssle
	Paul Moore
	Petr Viktorin
	R. David Murray
	Raymond Hettinger
	Robert Collins
	Ronald Oussoren
	Sandro Tosi
	Senthil Kumaran
	Serhiy Storchaka
	Stefan Behnel
	Steve Dower
	Steven D'Aprano
	Stéphane Wirtel
	Tal Einat
	Terry Jan Reedy
	Thomas Wouters
	Tim Golden
	Tim Peters
	Victor Stinner
	Vinay Sajip
	Walter Dörwald
	Xiang Zhang
	Yury Selivanov
	Zachary Ware


.. [1] This repository is private and accessible only to Python Core
   Developers, administrators, and Python Software Foundation Staff as it
   contains personal email addresses.



..
  Local Variables:
  mode: indented-text
  indent-tabs-mode: nil
  sentence-end-double-space: t
  fill-column: 70
  coding: utf-8
  End:
