PEP: 683
Title: Immortal Objects, Using a Fixed Refcount
Author: Eric Snow <ericsnowcurrently@gmail.com>, Eddie Elizondo <eduardo.elizondorueda@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/18183
Status: Accepted
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 10-Feb-2022
Python-Version: 3.12
Post-History: `16-Feb-2022 <https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/thread/TPLEYDCXFQ4AMTW6F6OQFINSIFYBRFCR/>`__,
              `19-Feb-2022 <https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/thread/KDAR6CCMPOX36GQJUDWHQBKRD5USNV3B/>`__,
              `28-Feb-2022 <https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/thread/MI22URMVKC63OFMZTALHFZKAKVGAT4UF/>`__,
              `12-Aug-2022 <https://discuss.python.org/t/18183>`__,
Resolution: https://discuss.python.org/t/18183/26


PEP Acceptance Conditions
=========================

The PEP was accepted with conditions:

* we must apply the primary proposal
  in `Solutions for Accidental De-Immortalization`_
  (reset the immortal refcount in ``tp_dealloc()``)
* types without this may not be immortalized (in CPython's code)
* the PEP must be updated with final benchmark results once
  the implmentation is finalized
* we will have one last round of discussion about those results at that point


Abstract
========

Currently the CPython runtime maintains a
`small amount of mutable state <Runtime Object State_>`_ in the
allocated memory of each object.  Because of this, otherwise immutable
objects are actually mutable.  This can have a large negative impact
on CPU and memory performance, especially for approaches to increasing
Python's scalability.

This proposal mandates that, internally, CPython will support marking
an object as one for which that runtime state will no longer change.
Consequently, such an object's refcount will never reach 0, and thus
the object will never be cleaned up (except when the runtime knows
it's safe to do so, like during runtime finalization).
We call these objects "immortal".  (Normally, only a relatively small
number of internal objects will ever be immortal.)
The fundamental improvement here is that now an object
can be truly immutable.

Scope
-----

Object immortality is meant to be an internal-only feature, so this
proposal does not include any changes to public API or behavior
(with one exception).  As usual, we may still add some private
(yet publicly accessible) API to do things like immortalize an object
or tell if one is immortal.  Any effort to expose this feature to users
would need to be proposed separately.

There is one exception to "no change in behavior": refcounting semantics
for immortal objects will differ in some cases from user expectations.
This exception, and the solution, are discussed below.

Most of this PEP focuses on an internal implementation that satisfies
the above mandate.  However, those implementation details are not meant
to be strictly proscriptive.  Instead, at the least they are included
to help illustrate the technical considerations required by the mandate.
The actual implementation may deviate somewhat as long as it satisfies
the constraints outlined below.  Furthermore, the acceptability of any
specific implementation detail described below does not depend on
the status of this PEP, unless explicitly specified.

For example, the particular details of:

* how to mark something as immortal
* how to recognize something as immortal
* which subset of functionally immortal objects are marked as immortal
* which memory-management activities are skipped or modified for immortal objects

are not only CPython-specific but are also private implementation
details that are expected to change in subsequent versions.

Implementation Summary
----------------------

Here's a high-level look at the implementation:

If an object's refcount matches a very specific value (defined below)
then that object is treated as immortal.  The CPython C-API and runtime
will not modify the refcount (or other runtime state) of an immortal
object.  The runtime will now be explicitly responsible for deallocating
all immortal objects during finalization, unless statically allocated.
(See `Object Cleanup`_ below.)

Aside from the change to refcounting semantics, there is one other
possible negative impact to consider.  The threshold for an "acceptable"
performance penalty for immortal objects is 2% (the consensus at the
2022 Language Summit).  A naive implementation of the approach described
below makes CPython roughly 4% slower.  However, the implementation
is ~performance-neutral~ once known mitigations are applied.

TODO: Update the performance impact for the latest branch
(both for GCC and for clang).


Motivation
==========

As noted above, currently all objects are effectively mutable.  That
includes "immutable" objects like ``str`` instances.  This is because
every object's refcount is frequently modified as the object is used
during execution.  This is especially significant for a number of
commonly used global (builtin) objects, e.g. ``None``.  Such objects
are used a lot, both in Python code and internally.  That adds up to
a consistent high volume of refcount changes.

The effective mutability of all Python objects has a concrete impact
on parts of the Python community, e.g. projects that aim for
scalability like Instagram or the effort to make the GIL
per-interpreter.  Below we describe several ways in which refcount
modification has a real negative effect on such projects.
None of that would happen for objects that are truly immutable.

Reducing CPU Cache Invalidation
-------------------------------

Every modification of a refcount causes the corresponding CPU cache
line to be invalidated.  This has a number of effects.

For one, the write must be propagated to other cache levels
and to main memory.  This has small effect on all Python programs.
Immortal objects would provide a slight relief in that regard.

On top of that, multi-core applications pay a price.  If two threads
(running simultaneously on distinct cores) are interacting with the
same object (e.g. ``None``)  then they will end up invalidating each
other's caches with each incref and decref.  This is true even for
otherwise immutable objects like ``True``, ``0``, and ``str`` instances.
CPython's GIL helps reduce this effect, since only one thread runs at a
time, but it doesn't completely eliminate the penalty.

Avoiding Data Races
-------------------

Speaking of multi-core, we are considering making the GIL
a per-interpreter lock, which would enable true multi-core parallelism.
Among other things, the GIL currently protects against races between
multiple concurrent threads that may incref or decref the same object.
Without a shared GIL, two running interpreters could not safely share
any objects, even otherwise immutable ones like ``None``.

This means that, to have a per-interpreter GIL, each interpreter must
have its own copy of *every* object.  That includes the singletons and
static types.  We have a viable strategy for that but it will require
a meaningful amount of extra effort and extra complexity.

The alternative is to ensure that all shared objects are truly immutable.
There would be no races because there would be no modification.  This
is something that the immortality proposed here would enable for
otherwise immutable objects.  With immortal objects,
support for a per-interpreter GIL
becomes much simpler.

Avoiding Copy-on-Write
----------------------

For some applications it makes sense to get the application into
a desired initial state and then fork the process for each worker.
This can result in a large performance improvement, especially
memory usage.  Several enterprise Python users (e.g. Instagram,
YouTube) have taken advantage of this.  However, the above
refcount semantics drastically reduce the benefits and
have led to some sub-optimal workarounds.

Also note that "fork" isn't the only operating system mechanism
that uses copy-on-write semantics.  Another example is ``mmap``.
Any such utility will potentially benefit from fewer copy-on-writes
when immortal objects are involved, when compared to using only
"mortal" objects.


Rationale
=========

The proposed solution is obvious enough that both of this proposal's
authors came to the same conclusion (and implementation, more or less)
independently.  The Pyston project `uses a similar approach <Pyston_>`_.
Other designs were also considered.  Several possibilities have also
been discussed on python-dev in past years.

Alternatives include:

* use a high bit to mark "immortal" but do not change ``Py_INCREF()``
* add an explicit flag to objects
* implement via the type (``tp_dealloc()`` is a no-op)
* track via the object's type object
* track with a separate table

Each of the above makes objects immortal, but none of them address
the performance penalties from refcount modification described above.

In the case of per-interpreter GIL, the only realistic alternative
is to move all global objects into ``PyInterpreterState`` and add
one or more lookup functions to access them.  Then we'd have to
add some hacks to the C-API to preserve compatibility for the
may objects exposed there.  The story is much, much simpler
with immortal objects.


Impact
======

Benefits
--------

Most notably, the cases described in the above examples stand
to benefit greatly from immortal objects.  Projects using pre-fork
can drop their workarounds.  For the per-interpreter GIL project,
immortal objects greatly simplifies the solution for existing static
types, as well as objects exposed by the public C-API.

In general, a strong immutability guarantee for objects enables Python
applications to scale better, particularly in
`multi-process deployments <Facebook>`_.  This is because they can then
leverage multi-core parallelism without such a significant tradeoff in
memory usage as they now have.  The cases we just described, as well as
those described above in `Motivation`_, reflect this improvement.

Performance
-----------

A naive implementation shows `a 4% slowdown`_.  We have demonstrated
a return to ~performance-neutral~ with a handful of basic mitigations
applied.  See the `mitigations`_ section below.

On the positive side, immortal objects save a significant amount of
memory when used `with a pre-fork model <Facebook>`_.  Also, immortal
objects provide opportunities for specialization in the eval loop that
would improve performance.

.. _a 4% slowdown: https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/19474#issuecomment-1032944709

TODO: Update the performance impact for the latest branch
(both for GCC and for clang).

Backward Compatibility
----------------------

Ideally this internal-only feature would be completely compatible.
However, it does involve a change to refcount semantics in some cases.
Only immortal objects are affected, but this includes high-use objects
like ``None``, ``True``, and ``False``.

Specifically, when an immortal object is involved:

* code that inspects the refcount will see a really, really large value
* the new noop behavior may break code that:

  * depends specifically on the refcount to always increment or decrement
    (or have a specific value from ``Py_SET_REFCNT()``)
  * relies on any specific refcount value, other than 0 or 1
  * directly manipulates the refcount to store extra information there

* in 32-bit pre-3.12 `Stable ABI`_ extensions,
  objects may leak due to `Accidental Immortality`_
* such extensions may crash due to `Accidental De-Immortalizing`_

Again, those changes in behavior only apply to immortal objects,
not the vast majority of objects a user will use.  Furthermore,
users cannot mark an object as immortal so no user-created objects
will ever have that changed behavior.  Users that rely on any of
the changing behavior for global (builtin) objects are already
in trouble.  So the overall impact should be small.

Also note that code which checks for refleaks should keep working fine,
unless it checks for hard-coded small values relative to some immortal
object.  The problems noticed by `Pyston`_ shouldn't apply here since
we do not modify the refcount.

See `Public Refcount Details`_ below for further discussion.

Accidental Immortality
''''''''''''''''''''''

Hypothetically, a non-immortal object could be incref'ed so much
that it reaches the magic value needed to be considered immortal.
That means it would never be decref'ed all the way back to 0, so it
would accidentally leak (never be cleaned up).

With 64-bit refcounts, this accidental scenario is so unlikely that
we need not worry.  Even if done deliberately by using ``Py_INCREF()``
in a tight loop and each iteration only took 1 CPU cycle, it would take
2^60 cycles (if the immortal bit were 2^60).  At a fast 5 GHz that would
still take nearly 250,000,000 seconds (over 2,500 days)!

Also note that it is doubly unlikely to be a problem because it wouldn't
matter until the refcount would have gotten back to 0 and the object
cleaned up.  So any object that hit that magic "immortal" refcount value
would have to be decref'ed that many times again before the change
in behavior would be noticed.

Again, the only realistic way that the magic refcount would be reached
(and then reversed) is if it were done deliberately.  (Of course, the
same thing could be done efficiently using ``Py_SET_REFCNT()`` though
that would be even less of an accident.)  At that point we don't
consider it a concern of this proposal.

On builds with much smaller maximum refcounts, like 32-bit platforms,
the consequences aren't so obvious.  Let's say the magic refcount
were 2^30.  Using the same specs as above, it would take roughly
4 seconds to accidentally immortalize an object.  Under reasonable
conditions, it is still highly unlikely that an object be accidentally
immortalized.  It would have to meet these criteria:

* targeting a non-immortal object (so not one of the high-use builtins)
* the extension increfs without a corresponding decref
  (e.g. returns from a function or method)
* no other code decrefs the object in the meantime

Even at a much less frequent rate it would not take long to reach
accidental immortality (on 32-bit).  However, then it would have to run
through the same number of (now noop-ing) decrefs before that one object
would be effectively leaking.  This is highly unlikely, especially because
the calculations assume no decrefs.

Furthermore, this isn't all that different from how such 32-bit extensions
can already incref an object past 2^31 and turn the refcount negative.
If that were an actual problem then we would have heard about it.

Between all of the above cases, the proposal doesn't consider
accidental immortality a problem.

Stable ABI
''''''''''

The implementation approach described in this PEP is compatible
with extensions compiled to the stable ABI (with the exception
of `Accidental Immortality`_ and `Accidental De-Immortalizing`_).
Due to the nature of the stable ABI, unfortunately, such extensions
use versions of ``Py_INCREF()``, etc. that directly modify the object's
``ob_refcnt`` field.  This will invalidate all the performance benefits
of immortal objects.

However, we do ensure that immortal objects (mostly) stay immortal
in that situation.  We set the initial refcount of immortal objects to
a value for which we can identify the object as immortal and which
continues to do so even if the refcount is modified by an extension.
(For example, suppose we used one of the high refcount bits to indicate
that an object was immortal.  We would set the initial refcount to a
higher value that still matches the bit, like halfway to the next bit.
See `_Py_IMMORTAL_REFCNT`_.)
At worst, objects in that situation would feel the effects
described in the `Motivation`_ section.  Even then
the overall impact is unlikely to be significant.

Accidental De-Immortalizing
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''

32-bit builds of older stable ABI extensions can take
`Accidental Immortality`_ to the next level.

Hypothetically, such an extension could incref an object to a value on
the next highest bit above the magic refcount value.  For example, if
the magic value were 2^30 and the initial immortal refcount were thus
2^30 + 2^29 then it would take 2^29 increfs by the extension to reach
a value of 2^31, making the object non-immortal.
(Of course, a refcount that high would probably already cause a crash,
regardless of immortal objects.)

The more problematic case is where such a 32-bit stable ABI extension
goes crazy decref'ing an already immortal object.  Continuing with the
above example, it would take 2^29 asymmetric decrefs to drop below the
magic immortal refcount value.  So an object like ``None`` could be
made mortal and subject to decref.  That still wouldn't be a problem
until somehow the decrefs continue on that object until it reaches 0.
For statically allocated immortal objects, like ``None``, the extension
would crash the process if it tried to dealloc the object.  For any
other immortal objects, the dealloc might be okay.  However, there
might be runtime code expecting the formerly-immortal object to be
around forever.  That code would probably crash.

Again, the likelihood of this happening is extremely small, even on
32-bit builds.  It would require roughly a billion decrefs on that
one object without a corresponding incref.  The most likely scenario is
the following:

A "new" reference to ``None`` is returned by many functions and methods.
Unlike with non-immortal objects, the 3.12 runtime will basically never
incref ``None`` before giving it to the extension.  However, the
extension *will* decref it when done with it (unless it returns it).
Each time that exchange happens with the one object, we get one step
closer to a crash.

How realistic is it that some form of that exchange (with a single
object) will happen a billion times in the lifetime of a Python process
on 32-bit?  If it is a problem, how could it be addressed?

As to how realistic, the answer isn't clear currently.  However, the
mitigation is simple enough that we can safely proceed under the
assumption that it would not be a problem.

We look at possible solutions
`later on <Solutions for Accidental De-Immortalization>`_.

Alternate Python Implementations
--------------------------------

This proposal is CPython-specific.  However, it does relate to the
behavior of the C-API, which may affect other Python implementations.
Consequently, the effect of changed behavior described in
`Backward Compatibility`_ above also applies here (e.g. if another
implementation is tightly coupled to specific refcount values, other
than 0, or on exactly how refcounts change, then they may impacted).

Security Implications
---------------------

This feature has no known impact on security.

Maintainability
---------------

This is not a complex feature so it should not cause much mental
overhead for maintainers.  The basic implementation doesn't touch
much code so it should have much impact on maintainability.  There
may be some extra complexity due to performance penalty mitigation.
However, that should be limited to where we immortalize all objects
post-init and later explicitly deallocate them during runtime
finalization.  The code for this should be relatively concentrated.


Specification
=============

The approach involves these fundamental changes:

* add `_Py_IMMORTAL_REFCNT`_ (the magic value) to the internal C-API
* update ``Py_INCREF()`` and ``Py_DECREF()`` to no-op for objects
  that match the magic refcount
* do the same for any other API that modifies the refcount
* stop modifying ``PyGC_Head`` for immortal GC objects ("containers")
* ensure that all immortal objects are cleaned up during
  runtime finalization

Then setting any object's refcount to ``_Py_IMMORTAL_REFCNT``
makes it immortal.

(There are other minor, internal changes which are not described here.)

In the following sub-sections we dive into the most significant details.
First we will cover some conceptual topics, followed by more concrete
aspects like specific affected APIs.

Public Refcount Details
-----------------------

In `Backward Compatibility`_ we introduced possible ways that user code
might be broken by the change in this proposal.  Any contributing
misunderstanding by users is likely due in large part to the names of
the refcount-related API and to how the documentation explains those
API (and refcounting in general).

Between the names and the docs, we can clearly see answers
to the following questions:

* what behavior do users expect?
* what guarantees do we make?
* do we indicate how to interpret the refcount value they receive?
* what are the use cases under which a user would set an object's
  refcount to a specific value?
* are users setting the refcount of objects they did not create?

As part of this proposal, we must make sure that users can clearly
understand on which parts of the refcount behavior they can rely and
which are considered implementation details.  Specifically, they should
use the existing public refcount-related API and the only refcount
values with any meaning are 0 and 1.  (Some code relies on 1 as an
indicator that the object can be safely modified.)  All other values
are considered "not 0 or 1".

This information will be clarified
in the `documentation <Documentation_>`_.

Arguably, the existing refcount-related API should be modified to reflect
what we want users to expect.  Something like the following:

* ``Py_INCREF()`` -> ``Py_ACQUIRE_REF()`` (or only support ``Py_NewRef()``)
* ``Py_DECREF()`` -> ``Py_RELEASE_REF()``
* ``Py_REFCNT()`` -> ``Py_HAS_REFS()``
* ``Py_SET_REFCNT()`` -> ``Py_RESET_REFS()`` and ``Py_SET_NO_REFS()``

However, such a change is not a part of this proposal.  It is included
here to demonstrate the tighter focus for user expectations that would
benefit this change.

Constraints
-----------

* ensure that otherwise immutable objects can be truly immutable
* minimize performance penalty for normal Python use cases
* be careful when immortalizing objects that we don't actually expect
  to persist until runtime finalization.
* be careful when immortalizing objects that are not otherwise immutable
* ``__del__`` and weakrefs must continue working properly

Regarding "truly" immutable objects, this PEP doesn't impact the
effective immutability of any objects, other than the per-object
runtime state (e.g. refcount).  So whether or not some immortal object
is truly (or even effectively) immutable can only be settled separately
from this proposal.  For example, str objects are generally considered
immutable, but ``PyUnicodeObject`` holds some lazily cached data.  This
PEP has no influence on how that state affects str immutability.

Immortal Mutable Objects
------------------------

Any object can be marked as immortal.  We do not propose any
restrictions or checks.  However, in practice the value of making an
object immortal relates to its mutability and depends on the likelihood
it would be used for a sufficient portion of the application's lifetime.
Marking a mutable object as immortal can make sense in some situations.

Many of the use cases for immortal objects center on immutability, so
that threads can safely and efficiently share such objects without
locking.  For this reason a mutable object, like a dict or list, would
never be shared (and thus no immortality).  However, immortality may
be appropriate if there is sufficient guarantee that the normally
mutable object won't actually be modified.

On the other hand, some mutable objects will never be shared between
threads (at least not without a lock like the GIL).  In some cases it
may be practical to make some of those immortal too.  For example,
``sys.modules`` is a per-interpreter dict that we do not expect to
ever get freed until the corresponding interpreter is finalized
(assuming it isn't replaced).  By making it immortal, we would
no longer incur the extra overhead during incref/decref.

We explore this idea further in the `mitigations`_ section below.

Implicitly Immortal Objects
---------------------------

If an immortal object holds a reference to a normal (mortal) object
then that held object is effectively immortal.  This is because that
object's refcount can never reach 0 until the immortal object releases
it.

Examples:

* containers like ``dict`` and ``list``
* objects that hold references internally like ``PyTypeObject`` with
  its ``tp_subclasses`` and ``tp_weaklist``
* an object's type (held in ``ob_type``)

Such held objects are thus implicitly immortal for as long as they are
held.  In practice, this should have no real consequences since it
really isn't a change in behavior.  The only difference is that the
immortal object (holding the reference) doesn't ever get cleaned up.

We do not propose that such implicitly immortal objects be changed
in any way.  They should not be explicitly marked as immortal just
because they are held by an immortal object.  That would provide
no advantage over doing nothing.

Un-Immortalizing Objects
------------------------

This proposal does not include any mechanism for taking an immortal
object and returning it to a "normal" condition.  Currently there
is no need for such an ability.

On top of that, the obvious approach is to simply set the refcount
to a small value.  However, at that point there is no way in knowing
which value would be safe.  Ideally we'd set it to the value that it
would have been if it hadn't been made immortal.  However, that value
will have long been lost.  Hence the complexities involved make it less
likely that an object could safely be un-immortalized, even if we
had a good reason to do so.

_Py_IMMORTAL_REFCNT
-------------------

We will add two internal constants::

    _Py_IMMORTAL_BIT - has the top-most available bit set (e.g. 2^62)
    _Py_IMMORTAL_REFCNT - has the two top-most available bits set

The actual top-most bit depends on existing uses for refcount bits,
e.g. the sign bit or some GC uses.  We will use the highest bit possible
after consideration of existing uses.

The refcount for immortal objects will be set to ``_Py_IMMORTAL_REFCNT``
(meaning the value will be halfway between ``_Py_IMMORTAL_BIT`` and the
value at the next highest bit).  However, to check if an object is
immortal we will compare (bitwise-and) its refcount against just
``_Py_IMMORTAL_BIT``.

The difference means that an immortal object will still be considered
immortal, even if somehow its refcount were modified (e.g. by an older
stable ABI extension).

Note that top two bits of the refcount are already reserved for other
uses.  That's why we are using the third top-most bit.

The implementation is also open to using other values for the immortal
bit, such as the sign bit or 2^31 (for saturated refcounts on 64-bit).

Affected API
------------

API that will now ignore immortal objects:

* (public) ``Py_INCREF()``
* (public) ``Py_DECREF()``
* (public) ``Py_SET_REFCNT()``
* (private) ``_Py_NewReference()``

API that exposes refcounts (unchanged but may now return large values):

* (public) ``Py_REFCNT()``
* (public) ``sys.getrefcount()``

(Note that ``_Py_RefTotal``, and consequently ``sys.gettotalrefcount()``,
will not be affected.)

TODO: clarify the status of ``_Py_RefTotal``.

Also, immortal objects will not participate in GC.

Immortal Global Objects
-----------------------

All runtime-global (builtin) objects will be made immortal.
That includes the following:

* singletons (``None``, ``True``, ``False``, ``Ellipsis``, ``NotImplemented``)
* all static types (e.g. ``PyLong_Type``, ``PyExc_Exception``)
* all static objects in ``_PyRuntimeState.global_objects`` (e.g. identifiers,
  small ints)

The question of making the full objects actually immutable (e.g.
for per-interpreter GIL) is not in the scope of this PEP.

Object Cleanup
--------------

In order to clean up all immortal objects during runtime finalization,
we must keep track of them.

For GC objects ("containers") we'll leverage the GC's permanent
generation by pushing all immortalized containers there.  During
runtime shutdown, the strategy will be to first let the runtime try
to do its best effort of deallocating these instances normally.  Most
of the module deallocation will now be handled by
``pylifecycle.c:finalize_modules()`` where we clean up the remaining
modules as best as we can.  It will change which modules are available
during ``__del__``, but that's already explicitly undefined behavior
in the docs.  Optionally, we could do some topological ordering
to guarantee that user modules will be deallocated first before
the stdlib modules.  Finally, anything left over (if any) can be found
through the permanent generation GC list which we can clear
after ``finalize_modules()`` is done.

For non-container objects, the tracking approach will vary on a
case-by-case basis.  In nearly every case, each such object is directly
accessible on the runtime state, e.g. in a ``_PyRuntimeState`` or
``PyInterpreterState`` field.  We may need to add a tracking mechanism
to the runtime state for a small number of objects.

None of the cleanup will have a significant effect on performance.

.. _mitigations:

Performance Regression Mitigations
----------------------------------

In the interest of clarity, here are some of the ways we are going
to try to recover some of the `4% performance <Performance_>`_
we lose with the naive implementation of immortal objects.

Note that none of this section is actually part of the proposal.

at the end of runtime init, mark all objects as immortal
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

We can apply the concept from
`Immortal Mutable Objects`_ in the pursuit of getting back some of
that 4% performance we lose with the naive implementation of immortal
objects.  At the end of runtime init we can mark *all* objects as
immortal and avoid the extra cost in incref/decref.  We only need
to worry about immutability with objects that we plan on sharing
between threads without a GIL.

drop unnecessary hard-coded refcount operations
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Parts of the C-API interact specifically with objects that we know
to be immortal, like ``Py_RETURN_NONE``.  Such functions and macros
can be updated to drop any refcount operations.

specialize for immortal objects in the eval loop
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

There are opportunities to optimize operations in the eval loop
involving speicific known immortal objects (e.g. ``None``).  The
general mechanism is described in :pep:`659`.  Also see `Pyston`_.

other possibilities
'''''''''''''''''''

* mark every interned string as immortal
* mark the "interned" dict as immortal if shared else share all interned strings
* (Larry,MAL) mark all constants unmarshalled for a module as immortal
* (Larry,MAL) allocate (immutable) immortal objects in their own memory page(s)
* saturated refcounts using the 32 least-significant bits

Solutions for Accidental De-Immortalization
-------------------------------------------

In the `Accidental De-Immortalizing`_ section we outlined a possible
negative consequence of immortal objects.  Here we look at some
of the options to deal with that.

Note that we enumerate solutions here to illustrate that satisfactory
options are available, rather than to dictate how the problem will
be solved.

Also note the following:

* this only matters in the 32-bit stable-ABI case
* it only affects immortal objects
* there are no user-defined immortal objects, only built-in types
* most immortal objects will be statically allocated
  (and thus already must fail if ``tp_dealloc()`` is called)
* only a handful of immortal objects will be used often enough
  to possibly face this problem in practice (e.g. ``None``)
* the main problem to solve is crashes coming from ``tp_dealloc()``

One fundamental observation for a solution is that we can reset
an immortal object's refcount to ``_Py_IMMORTAL_REFCNT``
when some condition is met.

With all that in mind, a simple, yet effective, solution would be
to reset an immortal object's refcount in ``tp_dealloc()``.
``NoneType`` and ``bool`` already have a ``tp_dealloc()`` that calls
``Py_FatalError()`` if triggered.  The same goes for other types based
on certain conditions, like ``PyUnicodeObject`` (depending on
``unicode_is_singleton()``), ``PyTupleObject``, and ``PyTypeObject``.
In fact, the same check is important for all statically declared object.
For those types, we would instead reset the refcount.  For the
remaining cases we would introduce the check.  In all cases,
the overhead of the check in ``tp_dealloc()`` should be too small
to matter.

Other (less practical) solutions:

* periodically reset the refcount for immortal objects
* only do that for high-use objects
* only do it if a stable-ABI extension has been imported
* provide a runtime flag for disabling immortality

(`The discussion thread <https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/message/OXAYWH47ZGLOWXTNKCIW4YE5PXGHNT4Y/>`__
has further detail.)

Regardless of the solution we end up with, we can do something else
later if necessary.

TODO: Add a note indicating that the implemented solution does not
affect the overall ~performance-neutral~ outcome.

Documentation
-------------

The immortal objects behavior and API are internal, implementation
details and will not be added to the documentation.

However, we will update the documentation to make public guarantees
about refcount behavior more clear.  That includes, specifically:

* ``Py_INCREF()`` - change "Increment the reference count for object o."
  to "Indicate taking a new reference to object o."
* ``Py_DECREF()`` - change "Decrement the reference count for object o."
  to "Indicate no longer using a previously taken reference to object o."
* similar for ``Py_XINCREF()``, ``Py_XDECREF()``, ``Py_NewRef()``,
  ``Py_XNewRef()``, ``Py_Clear()``
* ``Py_REFCNT()`` - add "The refcounts 0 and 1 have specific meanings
  and all others only mean code somewhere is using the object,
  regardless of the value.
  0 means the object is not used and will be cleaned up.
  1 means code holds exactly a single reference."
* ``Py_SET_REFCNT()`` - refer to ``Py_REFCNT()`` about how values over 1
  may be substituted with some over value

We *may* also add a note about immortal objects to the following,
to help reduce any surprise users may have with the change:

* ``Py_SET_REFCNT()`` (a no-op for immortal objects)
* ``Py_REFCNT()`` (value may be surprisingly large)
* ``sys.getrefcount()`` (value may be surprisingly large)

Other API that might benefit from such notes are currently undocumented.
We wouldn't add such a note anywhere else (including for ``Py_INCREF()``
and ``Py_DECREF()``) since the feature is otherwise transparent to users.


Reference Implementation
========================

The implementation is proposed on GitHub:

https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/19474


Open Issues
===========

* how realistic is the `Accidental De-Immortalizing`_ concern?


References
==========

.. _Pyston: https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/message/JLHRTBJGKAENPNZURV4CIJSO6HI62BV3/

.. _Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/watch/?v=437636037237097&t=560

Prior Art
---------

* `Pyston`_

Discussions
-----------

This was discussed in December 2021 on python-dev:

* https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/thread/7O3FUA52QGTVDC6MDAV5WXKNFEDRK5D6/#TBTHSOI2XRWRO6WQOLUW3X7S5DUXFAOV
* https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/thread/PNLBJBNIQDMG2YYGPBCTGOKOAVXRBJWY

Runtime Object State
--------------------

Here is the internal state that the CPython runtime keeps
for each Python object:

* `PyObject.ob_refcnt`_: the object's `refcount <refcounting_>`_
* `_PyGC_Head <PyGC_Head>`_: (optional) the object's node in a list of `"GC" objects <refcounting_>`_
* `_PyObject_HEAD_EXTRA <PyObject_HEAD_EXTRA>`_: (optional) the object's node in the list of heap objects

``ob_refcnt`` is part of the memory allocated for every object.
However, ``_PyObject_HEAD_EXTRA`` is allocated only if CPython was built
with ``Py_TRACE_REFS`` defined.  ``PyGC_Head`` is allocated only if the
object's type has ``Py_TPFLAGS_HAVE_GC`` set.  Typically this is only
container types (e.g. ``list``).  Also note that ``PyObject.ob_refcnt``
and ``_PyObject_HEAD_EXTRA`` are part of ``PyObject_HEAD``.

.. _PyObject.ob_refcnt: https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/80a9ba537f1f1666a9e6c5eceef4683f86967a1f/Include/object.h#L107
.. _PyGC_Head: https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/80a9ba537f1f1666a9e6c5eceef4683f86967a1f/Include/internal/pycore_gc.h#L11-L20
.. _PyObject_HEAD_EXTRA: https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/80a9ba537f1f1666a9e6c5eceef4683f86967a1f/Include/object.h#L68-L72

.. _refcounting:

Reference Counting, with Cyclic Garbage Collection
--------------------------------------------------

Garbage collection is a memory management feature of some programming
languages.  It means objects are cleaned up (e.g. memory freed)
once they are no longer used.

Refcounting is one approach to garbage collection.  The language runtime
tracks how many references are held to an object.  When code takes
ownership of a reference to an object or releases it, the runtime
is notified and it increments or decrements the refcount accordingly.
When the refcount reaches 0, the runtime cleans up the object.

With CPython, code must explicitly take or release references using
the C-API's ``Py_INCREF()`` and ``Py_DECREF()``.  These macros happen
to directly modify the object's refcount (unfortunately, since that
causes ABI compatibility issues if we want to change our garbage
collection scheme).  Also, when an object is cleaned up in CPython,
it also releases any references (and resources) it owns
(before it's memory is freed).

Sometimes objects may be involved in reference cycles, e.g. where
object A holds a reference to object B and object B holds a reference
to object A.  Consequently, neither object would ever be cleaned up
even if no other references were held (i.e. a memory leak).  The
most common objects involved in cycles are containers.

CPython has dedicated machinery to deal with reference cycles, which
we call the "cyclic garbage collector", or often just
"garbage collector" or "GC".  Don't let the name confuse you.
It only deals with breaking reference cycles.

See the docs for a more detailed explanation of refcounting
and cyclic garbage collection:

* https://docs.python.org/3.11/c-api/intro.html#reference-counts
* https://docs.python.org/3.11/c-api/refcounting.html
* https://docs.python.org/3.11/c-api/typeobj.html#c.PyObject.ob_refcnt
* https://docs.python.org/3.11/c-api/gcsupport.html


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.



..
    Local Variables:
    mode: indented-text
    indent-tabs-mode: nil
    sentence-end-double-space: t
    fill-column: 70
    coding: utf-8
    End:
