pep-0609.rst, before:

PEP: 609
Title: PyPA Governance
Version: $Revision$
Last-Modified: $Date$
Author: Dustin Ingram <di@python.org>,
        Pradyun Gedam <pradyunsg@gmail.com>
Sponsor: Paul Ganssle <paul@ganssle.io>
BDFL-Delegate: TBD
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-609-pypa-governance/
Status: Draft
Type: Process
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 05-Nov-2019
Post-History: 05-Nov-2019


Abstract
========

This document describes a governance model for the Python Packaging
Authority (PyPA). The model is closely based on existing informal
practices, with the intent of providing clarity into the functioning
of the PyPA and formalizing transparent processes for the PyPA.

Rationale
=========

The Python Packaging Authority (PyPA) is a collaborative community
that maintains and advances many of the relevant projects in Python
packaging. The software and standards developed through the PyPA are
used to package, share, and install Python software and to interact
with indexes of downloadable Python software such as `PyPI`_, the
Python Package Index.

Currently, the PyPA is an informal and loosely defined organization
that lacks true authority, and the inclusion of a given project under
the PyPA umbrella or the creation of new projects has been done in an
ad-hoc, one-off manner. Similarly, individual membership in the PyPA
is not well-defined.

While this model has more or less worked for the PyPA in the past, it
results in an organization which is missing certain features of a
stable ecosystem, namely a clear and transparent decision-making
process. This PEP seeks to rectify this by defining a governance model
for the PyPA.

Terminology
===========

Relevant terms for groups of individual contributors used in this PEP:

**PyPA members**:
  Anyone with the triage bit or commit bit, on at least one project in
  the `PyPA organization`_.

**PyPA committers**:
  Anyone with the commit bit on at least one project in the PyPA
  organization, which should correspond to everyone on the
  `PyPA-Committers`_ mailing list.

**PyPA community**:
  Anyone who is interested in PyPA activity and wants to follow along,
  contribute or make proposals.

**Packaging-WG members**:
  As described in the `Packaging-WG Wiki page`_. For clarity: there is no
  formal relationship between the Packaging-WG and PyPA. This group is
  only included in this list to disambiguate it from PyPA.

Goals
=====

The following section formalizes the goals (and non-goals) of the PyPA
and this governance model.

Goals of the PyPA
-----------------

These goals are the primary motivation for the existence of the PyPA.
These goals are largely already being carried out, even though most
have not been explicitly defined.

Provide support for existing projects under the PyPA
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

In the event that a given project needs additional support, or no
longer has active maintainers, the PyPA will ensure that the given
project will continue to be supported for users to the extent
necessary.

Foster the creation and acceptance of standards for PyPA projects
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The PyPA should, as much as possible, strive for standardization and
coordination across PyPA projects, primarily though the governance
process outlined below. PyPA projects are expected to abide by
applicable specifications maintained by the PyPA.

Guide decisions which affect multiple PyPA projects
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The PyPA community (especially PyPA members) should be expected to
provide opinions, insight and experience when ecosystem-wide changes
are being proposed.

Determine which projects should be under the guidance of the PyPA
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

For example: accepting new projects from the community, organically
creating projects within the PyPA, etc.

Enforce adherence to a Code of Conduct across all projects
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Generally this means leading by example, but occasionally it may mean
more explicit moderation.

Non-goals of the PyPA
---------------------

These are specific items that are explicitly _not_ goals of the PyPA.

Determine who is and isn't a PyPA member
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

This is for members of individual projects to decide, as they add new
members to their projects. Maintainership of a project that is under
the PyPA organization automatically transfers membership in the PyPA.

Micromanage individual projects
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

As long as the project is adhering to the Code of Conduct and
following specifications supported by the PyPA, the PyPA should only
concerned with large, ecosystem-wide changes.

Goals of the PyPA's Governance Model
------------------------------------

These are new goals which the governance model seeks to make possible.

Transparency in PyPA membership
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Provide a transparent process for decisions taken, regarding project
membership in the PyPA.

Document PyPA's use of PEPs
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Formally document how the PyPA uses Python Enhancement Proposals
(PEPs), for maintaining interoperability specifications defined by the
PyPA.

Processes
=========

The processes for the PyPA's activities are outlined below:

Specifications
--------------

The PyPA will use PEPs for defining, and making changes to, the
interoperability specifications maintained by the PyPA. Thus, the
Python Steering Council has the final say in the acceptance of these
interoperability specifications.

It is expected (but not required) that the Python Steering Council
delegates the authority to approve or reject PEPs to individuals
within the PyPA community. At the time of writing (November 2019), the
Python Steering Council has `standing delegations`_ for currently
active packaging interoperability specifications.

The details of the process of proposing and updating the
interoperability specifications are described in the `PyPA
Specifications`_ document.

Governance
----------

PyPA Committer Votes
''''''''''''''''''''

A PyPA member can put forward a proposal and call for a vote on a
public PyPA communication channel. A PyPA committer vote is triggered
when a PyPA committer (not the proposer) seconds the proposal.

The proposal will be put to a vote on the `PyPA-Committers`_ mailing
list, over a 7 day period. Each PyPA committer can vote once, and can
choose one of ``+1`` and ``-1``. If at least two thirds of voters vote
``+1``, then the vote succeeds.

PyPA committer votes are required for, and limited to, the following
kinds of proposals:

Addition of a project to the PyPA
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Proposing the acceptance of a project into the PyPA organization. This
proposal must not be opposed by the existing maintainers of the
project.

Creation of a new project in the PyPA
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Proposing the creation of a new tools / project in the PyPA
organization.

Removal of a project from PyPA
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Proposing the removal of a project in the PyPA organization.

Updates to the Governance/Specification Processes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Proposing changes to how the PyPA operates, including but not limited
to changes to its specification and governance processes, and this
PEP.

Leaving PyPA
''''''''''''

A project that is a part of the PyPA organization, can request to
leave PyPA.

Such requests can made by a committer of the project, on the
`PyPA-Committers`_ mailing list and must clearly state the GitHub
user/organization to transfer the repository to.

If the request is not opposed by another committer of the same project
over a 7 day period, the project would leave the PyPA and be
transferred out of the PyPA organization as per the request.

References
==========

.. _PyPI: https://pypi.org
.. _PyPA Organization: https://github.com/pypa
.. _PyPA Specifications: https://www.pypa.io/en/latest/specifications
.. _PyPA-Committers: https://mail.python.org/mm3/mailman3/lists/pypa-committers.python.org/
.. _Packaging-WG Wiki page: https://wiki.python.org/psf/PackagingWG
.. _standing delegations: https://github.com/python/steering-council/blob/master/process/standing-delegations.md#pypa-delegations


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.



..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:

Commit message:

PEP 609: Move PyPA to PSF Code of Conduct
Change PyPA governance procedures to reflect moving
under the PSF CoC.

Per conversation in
https://discuss.python.org/t/move-to-the-psf-code-of-conduct/3876/
and
https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-609-pypa-governance/2619/23 .

Signed-off-by: Sumana Harihareswara <sh@changeset.nyc>

pep-0609.rst, after:

PEP: 609
Title: PyPA Governance
Version: $Revision$
Last-Modified: $Date$
Author: Dustin Ingram <di@python.org>,
        Pradyun Gedam <pradyunsg@gmail.com>
Sponsor: Paul Ganssle <paul@ganssle.io>
BDFL-Delegate: TBD
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-609-pypa-governance/
Status: Draft
Type: Process
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 05-Nov-2019
Post-History: 05-Nov-2019


Abstract
========

This document describes a governance model for the Python Packaging
Authority (PyPA). The model is closely based on existing informal
practices, with the intent of providing clarity into the functioning
of the PyPA and formalizing transparent processes for the PyPA.

Rationale
=========

The Python Packaging Authority (PyPA) is a collaborative community
that maintains and advances many of the relevant projects in Python
packaging. The software and standards developed through the PyPA are
used to package, share, and install Python software and to interact
with indexes of downloadable Python software such as `PyPI`_, the
Python Package Index.

Currently, the PyPA is an informal and loosely defined organization
that lacks true authority, and the inclusion of a given project under
the PyPA umbrella or the creation of new projects has been done in an
ad-hoc, one-off manner. Similarly, individual membership in the PyPA
is not well-defined.

While this model has more or less worked for the PyPA in the past, it
results in an organization which is missing certain features of a
stable ecosystem, namely a clear and transparent decision-making
process. This PEP seeks to rectify this by defining a governance model
for the PyPA.

Terminology
===========

Relevant terms for groups of individual contributors used in this PEP:

**PyPA members**:
  Anyone with the triage bit or commit bit, on at least one project in
  the `PyPA organization`_.

**PyPA committers**:
  Anyone with the commit bit on at least one project in the PyPA
  organization, which should correspond to everyone on the
  `PyPA-Committers`_ mailing list.

**PyPA community**:
  Anyone who is interested in PyPA activity and wants to follow along,
  contribute or make proposals.

**Packaging-WG members**:
  As described in the `Packaging-WG Wiki page`_. For clarity: there is no
  formal relationship between the Packaging-WG and PyPA. This group is
  only included in this list to disambiguate it from PyPA.

Goals
=====

The following section formalizes the goals (and non-goals) of the PyPA
and this governance model.

Goals of the PyPA
-----------------

These goals are the primary motivation for the existence of the PyPA.
These goals are largely already being carried out, even though most
have not been explicitly defined.

Provide support for existing projects under the PyPA
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

In the event that a given project needs additional support, or no
longer has active maintainers, the PyPA will ensure that the given
project will continue to be supported for users to the extent
necessary.

Foster the creation and acceptance of standards for PyPA projects
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The PyPA should, as much as possible, strive for standardization and
coordination across PyPA projects, primarily though the governance
process outlined below. PyPA projects are expected to abide by
applicable specifications maintained by the PyPA.

Guide decisions which affect multiple PyPA projects
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The PyPA community (especially PyPA members) should be expected to
provide opinions, insight and experience when ecosystem-wide changes
are being proposed.

Determine which projects should be under the guidance of the PyPA
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

For example: accepting new projects from the community, organically
creating projects within the PyPA, etc.

Enforce adherence to a Code of Conduct across all projects
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Generally this means leading by example, but occasionally it may mean
more explicit moderation.

Non-goals of the PyPA
---------------------

These are specific items that are explicitly _not_ goals of the PyPA.

Determine who is and isn't a PyPA member
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

This is for members of individual projects to decide, as they add new
members to their projects. Maintainership of a project that is under
the PyPA organization automatically transfers membership in the PyPA.

Micromanage individual projects
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

As long as the project is adhering to the Code of Conduct and
following specifications supported by the PyPA, the PyPA should only
concerned with large, ecosystem-wide changes.

Develop and maintain standalone Code of Conduct
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

PyPA projects follow `the PSF Code of Conduct`_.


Goals of the PyPA's Governance Model
------------------------------------

These are new goals which the governance model seeks to make possible.

Transparency in PyPA membership
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Provide a transparent process for decisions taken, regarding project
membership in the PyPA.

Document PyPA's use of PEPs
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Formally document how the PyPA uses Python Enhancement Proposals
(PEPs), for maintaining interoperability specifications defined by the
PyPA.

Processes
=========

The processes for the PyPA's activities are outlined below:

Specifications
--------------

The PyPA will use PEPs for defining, and making changes to, the
interoperability specifications maintained by the PyPA. Thus, the
Python Steering Council has the final say in the acceptance of these
interoperability specifications.

It is expected (but not required) that the Python Steering Council
delegates the authority to approve or reject PEPs to individuals
within the PyPA community. At the time of writing (November 2019), the
Python Steering Council has `standing delegations`_ for currently
active packaging interoperability specifications.

The details of the process of proposing and updating the
interoperability specifications are described in the `PyPA
Specifications`_ document.

Governance
----------

PyPA Committer Votes
''''''''''''''''''''

A PyPA member can put forward a proposal and call for a vote on a
public PyPA communication channel. A PyPA committer vote is triggered
when a PyPA committer (not the proposer) seconds the proposal.

The proposal will be put to a vote on the `PyPA-Committers`_ mailing
list, over a 7 day period. Each PyPA committer can vote once, and can
choose one of ``+1`` and ``-1``. If at least two thirds of voters vote
``+1``, then the vote succeeds.

PyPA committer votes are required for, and limited to, the following
kinds of proposals:

Addition of a project to the PyPA
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Proposing the acceptance of a project into the PyPA organization. This
proposal must not be opposed by the existing maintainers of the
project.

Creation of a new project in the PyPA
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Proposing the creation of a new tools / project in the PyPA
organization.

Removal of a project from PyPA
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Proposing the removal of a project in the PyPA organization.

Updates to the Governance/Specification Processes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Proposing changes to how the PyPA operates, including but not limited
to changes to its specification and governance processes, and this
PEP.

Leaving PyPA
''''''''''''

A project that is a part of the PyPA organization, can request to
leave PyPA.

Such requests can made by a committer of the project, on the
`PyPA-Committers`_ mailing list and must clearly state the GitHub
user/organization to transfer the repository to.

If the request is not opposed by another committer of the same project
over a 7 day period, the project would leave the PyPA and be
transferred out of the PyPA organization as per the request.

Code of Conduct enforcement
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Each project that is a part of the PyPA organization follows `the PSF
Code of Conduct`_, including its incident reporting guidelines and
enforcement procedures.

PyPA members are responsible for leading by example. PyPA members
occasionally may need to more explicitly moderate behavior in their
projects, and each project that is a part of the PyPA organization
must designate at least one PyPA member as available to contact in
case of a Code of Conduct incident. If told of any Code of Conduct
incidents involving their projects, PyPA members are expected to
report those incidents up to `the PSF Conduct WG`_, for recording
purposes and for potential assistance.


References
==========

.. _PyPI: https://pypi.org
.. _PyPA Organization: https://github.com/pypa
.. _PyPA Specifications: https://www.pypa.io/en/latest/specifications
.. _PyPA-Committers: https://mail.python.org/mm3/mailman3/lists/pypa-committers.python.org/
.. _Packaging-WG Wiki page: https://wiki.python.org/psf/PackagingWG
.. _standing delegations: https://github.com/python/steering-council/blob/master/process/standing-delegations.md#pypa-delegations
.. _the PSF Code of Conduct: https://www.python.org/psf/conduct/
.. _the PSF Conduct WG: https://wiki.python.org/psf/ConductWG/Charter

Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.



..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
