pep-0619.rst, before:

PEP: 619
Title: Python 3.10 Release Schedule
Version: $Revision$
Last-Modified: $Date$
Author: Pablo Galindo Salgado <pablogsal@python.org>
Status: Draft
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 25-May-2020
Python-Version: 3.10


Abstract
========

This document describes the development and release schedule for
Python 3.10.  The schedule primarily concerns itself with PEP-sized
items.

.. Small features may be added up to the first beta
   release.  Bugs may be fixed until the final release,
   which is planned for end of October 2021.

Release Manager and Crew
========================

- 3.10 Release Manager: Pablo Galindo Salgado
- Windows installers: Steve Dower
- Mac installers: Ned Deily
- Documentation: Julien Palard


Release Schedule
================

3.10.0 schedule
---------------

Note: the dates below use a 17-month development period that results
in a 12-month release cadence between major versions, as defined by
PEP 602.

Actual:

- 3.10 development begins: Monday, 2020-05-18

Expected:

- 3.10.0 alpha 1: Monday, 2020-10-05
- 3.10.0 alpha 2: Monday, 2020-11-02
- 3.10.0 alpha 3: Monday, 2020-12-07
- 3.10.0 alpha 4: Monday, 2021-01-04
- 3.10.0 alpha 5: Monday, 2021-02-01
- 3.10.0 alpha 6: Monday, 2021-03-01
- 3.10.0 alpha 7: Monday, 2021-04-05

- 3.10.0 beta 1: Monday, 2021-05-03
  (No new features beyond this point.)

- 3.10.0 beta 2: Tuesday, 2021-05-25
- 3.10.0 beta 3: Thursday, 2021-06-17
- 3.10.0 beta 4: Saturday, 2021-07-10
- 3.10.0 candidate 1: Monday, 2021-08-02
- 3.10.0 candidate 2: Monday, 2021-09-06 (if necessary)
- 3.10.0 final: Monday, 2021-10-04

Subsequent bugfix releases at a monthly cadence.

3.10 Lifespan
-------------

3.10 will receive bugfix updates approximately every month for
approximately 12 months.  After the release of 3.11.0 final, a final
3.10 bugfix update will be released.  After that, it is expected that
security updates (source only) will be released until 5 years after
the release of 3.10 final, so until approximately October 2026.


Features for 3.10
=================

Nothing yet, go write a PEP!


Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.


..
  Local Variables:
  mode: indented-text
  indent-tabs-mode: nil
  sentence-end-double-space: t
  fill-column: 72
  coding: utf-8
  End:

Commit message:

PEP 619: Add PEP 618 to Python 3.10 release schedule (#1442)

pep-0619.rst, after:

PEP: 619
Title: Python 3.10 Release Schedule
Version: $Revision$
Last-Modified: $Date$
Author: Pablo Galindo Salgado <pablogsal@python.org>
Status: Draft
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 25-May-2020
Python-Version: 3.10


Abstract
========

This document describes the development and release schedule for
Python 3.10.  The schedule primarily concerns itself with PEP-sized
items.

.. Small features may be added up to the first beta
   release.  Bugs may be fixed until the final release,
   which is planned for end of October 2021.

Release Manager and Crew
========================

- 3.10 Release Manager: Pablo Galindo Salgado
- Windows installers: Steve Dower
- Mac installers: Ned Deily
- Documentation: Julien Palard


Release Schedule
================

3.10.0 schedule
---------------

Note: the dates below use a 17-month development period that results
in a 12-month release cadence between major versions, as defined by
PEP 602.

Actual:

- 3.10 development begins: Monday, 2020-05-18

Expected:

- 3.10.0 alpha 1: Monday, 2020-10-05
- 3.10.0 alpha 2: Monday, 2020-11-02
- 3.10.0 alpha 3: Monday, 2020-12-07
- 3.10.0 alpha 4: Monday, 2021-01-04
- 3.10.0 alpha 5: Monday, 2021-02-01
- 3.10.0 alpha 6: Monday, 2021-03-01
- 3.10.0 alpha 7: Monday, 2021-04-05

- 3.10.0 beta 1: Monday, 2021-05-03
  (No new features beyond this point.)

- 3.10.0 beta 2: Tuesday, 2021-05-25
- 3.10.0 beta 3: Thursday, 2021-06-17
- 3.10.0 beta 4: Saturday, 2021-07-10
- 3.10.0 candidate 1: Monday, 2021-08-02
- 3.10.0 candidate 2: Monday, 2021-09-06 (if necessary)
- 3.10.0 final: Monday, 2021-10-04

Subsequent bugfix releases at a monthly cadence.

3.10 Lifespan
-------------

3.10 will receive bugfix updates approximately every month for
approximately 12 months.  After the release of 3.11.0 final, a final
3.10 bugfix update will be released.  After that, it is expected that
security updates (source only) will be released until 5 years after
the release of 3.10 final, so until approximately October 2026.


Features for 3.10
=================

Some of the notable features of Python 3.10 include:

* :pep:`618`, Add Optional Length-Checking To ``zip``


Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.


..
  Local Variables:
  mode: indented-text
  indent-tabs-mode: nil
  sentence-end-double-space: t
  fill-column: 72
  coding: utf-8
  End:
