PEP: 8104
Title: 2023 Term Steering Council election
Author: Ee Durbin <ee@python.org>
Sponsor: Brett Cannon <brett@python.org>
Status: Active
Type: Informational
Topic: Governance
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 08-Nov-2022


Abstract
========

This document describes the schedule and other details of the December
2022 election for the Python steering council, as specified in
:pep:`13`. This is the steering council election for the 2023 term
(i.e. Python 3.12).


Election Administration
=======================

The steering council appointed the
`Python Software Foundation <https://www.python.org/psf-landing/>`__
Director of Infrastructure, Ee Durbin, to administer the election.


Schedule
========

There will be a two-week nomination period, followed by a two-week
vote.

The nomination period was: November 14, 2022 through `November 28, 2022 AoE
<https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=Python+Steering+Council+nominations+close&iso=20221129T00&p1=3399>`_ [#note-aoe]_.

The voting period was: December 1, 2022 through `December 14, 2022 AoE
<https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=Python+Steering+Council+voting+closes&iso=20221215T00&p1=3399>`_ [#note-aoe]_.


Candidates
==========

Candidates must be nominated by a core team member. If the candidate
is a core team member, they may nominate themselves.

Nominees (in alphabetical order):

- `Brett Cannon <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-brett-cannon-2023-term/21078>`_
- `Emily Morehouse <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-emily-morehouse-2023-term/21329>`_
- `Dong-hee Na <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-dong-hee-na-2023-term/21424/1>`_
- `Pablo Galindo Salgado <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-pablo-galindo-salgado-2023-term/21307>`_
- `Gregory P. Smith <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-gregory-p-smith-2023-term/21332/1>`_
- `Victor Stinner <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-victor-stinner-2023-term/21407/1>`_
- `Petr Viktorin <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-petr-viktorin-2023-term/21478>`_
- `Thomas Wouters <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-thomas-wouters-2023-term/21147>`_

Withdrawn nominations:

- None

Voter Roll
==========

All active Python core team members are eligible to vote. Active status
is determined as :pep:`described in PEP 13 <13#membership>`
and implemented via the software at `python/voters <https://github.com/python/voters>`_
[#note-voters]_.

Ballots will be distributed based on the the `Python Voter Roll
<https://github.com/python/voters/blob/master/voter-files/>`_ [#note-voters]_
for this election.

While this file is not public as it contains private email addresses, the
`Complete Voter Roll`_ by name will be made available when the roll is
created.

Election Implementation
=======================

The election will be conducted using the `Helios Voting Service
<https://heliosvoting.org>`__.


Configuration
-------------

Short name: ``2023-python-steering-council``

Name: ``2023 Python Steering Council Election``

Description: ``Election for the Python steering council, as specified in PEP 13. This is steering council election for the 2023 term.``

type: ``Election``

Use voter aliases: ``[X]``

Randomize answer order: ``[X]``

Private: ``[X]``

Help Email Address: ``psf-election@python.org``

Voting starts at: ``December 1, 2022 12:00 UTC``

Voting ends at: ``December 15, 2022 12:00 UTC``

This will create an election in which:

* Voting is not open to the public, only those on the `Voter Roll`_ may
  participate. Ballots will be emailed when voting starts.
* Candidates are presented in random order, to help avoid bias.
* Voter identities and ballots are protected against cryptographic advances.

Questions
---------

Question 1
~~~~~~~~~~

Select between ``0`` and ``- (approval)`` answers. Result Type: ``absolute``

Question: ``Select candidates for the Python Steering Council``

Answer #1 - #N: ``Candidates from Candidates_ Section``



Results
=======

Of 85 eligible voters, 66 cast ballots.

The top five vote-getters are:

* Pablo Galindo Salgado
* Gregory P. Smith
* Emily Morehouse
* Brett Cannon
* Thomas Wouters

No conflict of interest as defined in :pep:`13` were observed.

The full vote counts are as follows:

+-----------------------+----------------+
| Candidate             | Votes Received |
+=======================+================+
| Pablo Galindo Salgado | 61             |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| Gregory P. Smith      | 48             |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| Emily Morehouse       | 47             |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| Brett Cannon          | 42             |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| Thomas Wouters        | 39             |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| Petr Viktorin         | 36             |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| Victor Stinner        | 34             |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| Dong-hee Na           | 29             |
+-----------------------+----------------+

Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.


Complete Voter Roll
===================

Active Python core developers
-----------------------------

.. code-block:: text

    Alex Gaynor
    Alex Waygood
    Ammar Askar
    Andrew Svetlov
    Antoine Pitrou
    Barry Warsaw
    Batuhan Taskaya
    Benjamin Peterson
    Berker Peksağ
    Brandt Bucher
    Brett Cannon
    Brian Curtin
    Brian Quinlan
    Carol Willing
    Cheryl Sabella
    Chris Jerdonek
    Chris Withers
    Christian Heimes
    Dennis Sweeney
    Dino Viehland
    Dong-hee Na
    Emily Morehouse
    Éric Araujo
    Eric Snow
    Eric V. Smith
    Erlend Egeberg Aasland
    Ethan Furman
    Ezio Melotti
    Facundo Batista
    Filipe Laíns
    Fred Drake
    Georg Brandl
    Giampaolo Rodolà
    Gregory P. Smith
    Guido van Rossum
    Hugo van Kemenade
    Hynek Schlawack
    Inada Naoki
    Irit Katriel
    Ivan Levkivskyi
    Jason R. Coombs
    Jelle Zijlstra
    Jeremy Kloth
    Jesús Cea
    Joannah Nanjekye
    Julien Palard
    Karthikeyan Singaravelan
    Ken Jin
    Kumar Aditya
    Kurt B. Kaiser
    Kushal Das
    Kyle Stanley
    Larry Hastings
    Łukasz Langa
    Lysandros Nikolaou
    Marc-André Lemburg
    Mariatta
    Mark Dickinson
    Mark Shannon
    Nathaniel J. Smith
    Ned Deily
    Neil Schemenauer
    Nick Coghlan
    Pablo Galindo
    Paul Ganssle
    Paul Moore
    Petr Viktorin
    R. David Murray
    Raymond Hettinger
    Ronald Oussoren
    Senthil Kumaran
    Serhiy Storchaka
    Stefan Behnel
    Stéphane Wirtel
    Steve Dower
    Steven D'Aprano
    Tal Einat
    Terry Jan Reedy
    Thomas Wouters
    Tim Golden
    Tim Peters
    Victor Stinner
    Vinay Sajip
    Yury Selivanov
    Zachary Ware


.. [#note-voters] This repository is private and accessible only to Python Core
   Developers, administrators, and Python Software Foundation Staff as it
   contains personal email addresses.
.. [#note-aoe] AoE: `Anywhere on Earth <https://www.ieee802.org/16/aoe.html>`_.
