PEP: 615
Title: Support for the IANA Time Zone Database in the Standard Library
Author: Paul Ganssle <paul at ganssle.io>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/3468
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 2020-02-22
Python-Version: 3.9
Post-History: 2020-02-25
Replaces: 431


Abstract
========

This proposes adding a module, ``zoneinfo``, to provide a concrete time zone
implementation supporting the IANA time zone database.  By default,
``zoneinfo`` will use the system's time zone data if available; if no system
time zone data is available, the library will fall back to using the
first-party package ``tzdata``, deployed on PyPI.

Motivation
==========

The ``datetime`` library uses a flexible mechanism to handle time zones: all
conversions and time zone information queries are delegated to an instance of a
subclass of the abstract ``datetime.tzinfo`` base class. [#tzinfo]_ This allows
users to implement arbitrarily complex time zone rules, but in practice the
majority of users want support for just three types of time zone: [a]_

1. UTC and fixed offsets thereof
2. The system local time zone
3. IANA time zones

In Python 3.2, the ``datetime.timezone`` class was introduced to support the
first class of time zone (with a special ``datetime.timezone.utc`` singleton
for UTC).

While there is still no "local" time zone, in Python 3.0 the semantics of naïve
time zones was changed to support many "local time" operations, and it is now
possible to get a fixed time zone offset from a local time::

    >>> print(datetime(2020, 2, 22, 12, 0).astimezone())
    2020-02-22 12:00:00-05:00
    >>> print(datetime(2020, 2, 22, 12, 0).astimezone()
    ...       .strftime("%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S %Z"))
    2020-02-22 12:00:00 EST
    >>> print(datetime(2020, 2, 22, 12, 0).astimezone(timezone.utc))

However, there is still no support for the time zones described in the IANA
time zone database (also called the "tz" database or the Olson database
[#tzdb-wiki]_).  The time zone database is in the public domain and is widely
distributed — it is present by default on many Unix-like operating systems.
Great care goes into the stability of the database: there are IETF RFCs both
for the maintenance procedures (RFC 6557 [#rfc6557]_) and for the compiled
binary (TZif) format (RFC 8636 [#rfc8536]_).  As such, it is likely that adding
support for the compiled outputs of the IANA database will add great value to
end users even with the relatively long cadence of standard library releases.


Proposal
========

This PEP has three main concerns:

1. The semantics of the ``zoneinfo.ZoneInfo`` class (zoneinfo-class_)
2. Time zone data sources used (data-sources_)
3. Options for configuration of the time zone search path (search-path-config_)

Because of the complexity of the proposal, rather than having separate
"specification" and "rationale" sections the design decisions and rationales
are grouped together by subject.

.. _zoneinfo-class:

The ``zoneinfo.ZoneInfo`` class
-------------------------------

.. _Constructors:

Constructors
############

The initial design of the ``zoneinfo.ZoneInfo`` class has several constructors.

.. code-block::

    ZoneInfo(key: str)

The primary constructor takes a single argument, ``key``, which is a string
indicating the name of a zone file in the system time zone database (e.g.
``"America/New_York"``, ``"Europe/London"``), and returns a ``ZoneInfo``
constructed from the first matching data source on search path (see the
data-sources_ section for more details). All zone information must be eagerly
read from the data source (usually a TZif file) upon construction, and may
not change during the lifetime of the object (this restriction applies to all
``ZoneInfo`` constructors).

One somewhat unusual guarantee made by this constructor is that calls with
identical arguments must return *identical* objects. Specifically, for all
values of ``key``, the following assertion must always be valid [b]_::

    a = ZoneInfo(key)
    b = ZoneInfo(key)
    assert a is b

The reason for this comes from the fact that the semantics of datetime
operations (e.g. comparison, arithmetic) depend on whether the datetimes
involved represent the same or different zones; two datetimes are in the same
zone only if ``dt1.tzinfo is dt2.tzinfo``. [#nontransitive_comp]_ In addition
to the modest performance benefit from avoiding unnecessary proliferation of
``ZoneInfo`` objects, providing this guarantee should minimize surprising
behavior for end users.

|dateutil.tz.gettz| has provided a similar guarantee since version 2.7.0
(release March 2018). [#dateutil-tz]_

.. |dateutil.tz.gettz| replace:: ``dateutil.tz.gettz``
.. _dateutil.tz.gettz: https://dateutil.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tz.html#dateutil.tz.gettz

.. note::

    The implementation may decide how to implement the cache behavior, but the
    guarantee made here only requires that as long as two references exist to
    the result of identical constructor calls, they must be references to the
    same object. This is consistent with a reference counted cache where
    ``ZoneInfo`` objects are ejected when no references to them exist (for
    example, a cache implemented with a ``weakref.WeakValueDictionary``) — it is
    allowed but not required or recommended to implement this with a "strong"
    cache, where all ``ZoneInfo`` files are kept alive indefinitely.

.. code-block::

    ZoneInfo.nocache(key: str)

This is an alternate constructor that bypasses the constructor's cache.  It is
identical to the primary constructor, but returns a new object on each call.
This is likely most useful for testing purposes, or to deliberately induce
"different zone" semantics between datetimes with the same nominal time zone.

Even if an object constructed by this method would have been a cache miss, it
must not be entered into the cache; in other words, the following assertion
should always be true:

.. code-block::

    >>> a = ZoneInfo.nocache(key)
    >>> b = ZoneInfo(key)
    >>> a is not b

.. code-block::

    ZoneInfo.from_file(fobj: IO[bytes], /, key: str = None)

This is an alternate constructor that allows the construction of a ``ZoneInfo``
object from any TZif byte stream.  This constructor takes an optional
parameter, ``key``, which sets the name of the zone, for the purposes of
``__str__`` and ``__repr__`` (see Representations_).

Unlike the primary constructor, this always constructs a new object.  There are
two reasons that this deviates from the primary constructor's caching behavior:
stream objects have mutable state and so determining whether two inputs are
identical is difficult or impossible, and it is likely that users constructing
from a file specifically want to load from that file and not a cache.

As with ``ZoneInfo.nocache``, objects constructed by this method must not be
added to the cache.

Behavior during data updates
############################

If a source of time zone data is updated during a run of the interpreter, it
will not invalidate any caches or modify any existing ``ZoneInfo`` objects, but
newly constructed ``ZoneInfo`` objects should come from the updated data
source.

This means that the point at which a ``ZoneInfo`` file is updated depends
primarily on the semantics of the caching behavior. The only guaranteed way to
get a ``ZoneInfo`` file from an updated data source is to induce a cache miss,
either by bypassing the cache and using ``ZoneInfo.nocache`` or by clearing the
cache.

.. note::

    The specified cache behavior does not require that the cache be lazily
    populated — it is consistent with the specification (though not
    recommended) to eagerly pre-populate the cache with time zones that have
    never been constructed.

.. _Representations:

String representation
#####################

The ``ZoneInfo`` class's ``__str__`` representation will be drawn from the
``key`` parameter.  This is partially because the ``key`` represents a
human-readable "name" of the string, but also because it is a useful parameter
that users will want exposed.  It is necessary to provide a mechanism to expose
the key for serialization between languages and because it is also a primary
key for localization projects like CLDR (the Unicode Common Locale Data
Repository [#cldr]_).

An example:

.. code-block::

    >>> zone = ZoneInfo("Pacific/Kwajalein")
    >>> str(zone)
    'Pacific/Kwajalein'

When a ``key`` is not specified, the ``str`` operation should not fail, but
should return the file's ``__repr__``::

    >>> zone = ZoneInfo.from_file(f)
    >>> str(zone)
    'ZoneInfo.from_file(<_io.BytesIO object at ...>)'

The ``__repr__`` for a ``ZoneInfo`` is implementation-defined and not
necessarily stable between versions, but it must not be a valid ``ZoneInfo``
key.

Pickle serialization
####################

Rather than serializing all transition data, ``ZoneInfo`` objects will be
serialized by key, and ``ZoneInfo`` objects constructed from raw files (even
those with a value for ``key`` specified) cannot be pickled.

The behavior of a ``ZoneInfo`` file depends on how it was constructed:

1. ``ZoneInfo(key)``: When constructed with the primary constructor, a
   ``ZoneInfo`` object will be serialized by key, and when deserialized the
   will use the primary constructor in the deserializing process, and thus be
   expected to be the same object as other references to the same time zone.
   For example, if ``europe_berlin_pkl`` is a string containing a pickle
   constructed from ``ZoneInfo("Europe/Berlin")``, one would expect the
   following behavior:

   .. code-block::

       >>> a = ZoneInfo("Europe/Berlin")
       >>> b = pickle.loads(europe_berlin_pkl)
       >>> a is b
       True

2. ``ZoneInfo.nocache(key)``: When constructed from the cache-bypassing
   constructor, the ``ZoneInfo`` object will still be serialized by key, but
   when deserialized, it will use the cache bypassing constructor. If
   ``europe_berlin_pkl_nc`` is a string containing a pickle constructed from
   ``ZoneInfo.nocache("Europe/Berlin")``, one would expect the following
   behavior:

   .. code-block::

       >>> a = ZoneInfo("Europe/Berlin")
       >>> b = pickle.loads(europe_berlin_pkl_nc)
       >>> a is b
       False

3. ``ZoneInfo.from_file(fobj, /, key=None)``: When constructed from a file, the
   ``ZoneInfo`` object will raise an exception on pickling. If an end user
   wants to pickle a ``ZoneInfo`` constructed from a file, it is recommended
   that they use a wrapper type or a custom serialization function: either
   serializing by key or storing the contents of the file object and
   serializing that.

This method of serialization requires that the time zone data for the required
key be available on both the serializing and deserializing side, similar to the
way that references to classes and functions are expected to exist in both the
serializing and deserializing environments. It also means that no guarantees
are made about the consistency of results when unpickling a ``ZoneInfo``
pickled in an environment with a different version of the time zone data.

.. _data-sources:

Sources for time zone data
--------------------------

One of the hardest challenges for IANA time zone support is keeping the data up
to date; between 1997 and 2020, there have been between 3 and 21 releases per
year, often in response to changes in time zone rules with little to no notice
(see [#timing-of-tz-changes]_ for more details).  In order to keep up to date,
and to give the system administrator control over the data source, we propose
to use system-deployed time zone data wherever possible.  However, not all
systems ship a publicly accessible time zone database — notably Windows uses a
different system for managing time zones — and so if available ``zoneinfo``
falls back to an installable first-party package, ``tzdata``, available on
PyPI.  If no system zoneinfo files are found but ``tzdata`` is installed, the
primary ``ZoneInfo`` constructor will use ``tzdata`` as the time zone source.

System time zone information
############################

Many Unix-like systems deploy time zone data by default, or provide a canonical
time zone data package (often called ``tzdata``, as it is on Arch Linux, Fedora,
and Debian).  Whenever possible, it would be preferable to defer to the system
time zone information, because this allows time zone information for all
language stacks to be updated and maintained in one place.  Python distributors
are encouraged to ensure that time zone data is installed alongside Python
whenever possible (e.g. by declaring ``tzdata`` as a dependency for the
``python`` package).

The ``zoneinfo`` module will use a "search path" strategy analogous to the
``PATH`` environment variable  or the ``sys.path`` variable in Python; the
``zoneinfo.TZPATH`` variable will be read-only (see search-path-config_ for
more details), ordered list of time zone data locations to search.  When
creating a ``ZoneInfo`` instance from a key, the zone file will be constructed
from the first data source on the path in which the key exists, so for example,
if ``TZPATH`` were::

    TZPATH = (
        "/usr/share/zoneinfo",
        "/etc/zoneinfo"
        )

and (although this would be very unusual) ``/usr/share/zoneinfo`` contained
only ``America/New_York`` and ``/etc/zoneinfo`` contained both
``America/New_York`` and ``Europe/Moscow``, then
``ZoneInfo("America/New_York")`` would be satisfied by
``/usr/share/zoneinfo/America/New_York``, while ``ZoneInfo("Europe/Moscow")``
would be satisfied by ``/etc/zoneinfo/Europe/Moscow``.

At the moment, on Windows systems, the search path will default to empty,
because Windows does not officially ship a copy of the time zone database.  On
non-Windows systems, the search path will default to a list of the most
commonly observed search paths.  Although this is subject to change in future
versions, at launch the default search path will be::

    TZPATH = (
        "/usr/share/zoneinfo",
        "/usr/lib/zoneinfo",
        "/usr/share/lib/zoneinfo",
        "/etc/zoneinfo",
    )

This may be configured both at compile time or at runtime; more information on
configuration options at search-path-config_.

The ``tzdata`` Python package
#############################

In order to ensure easy access to time zone data for all end users, this PEP
proposes to create a data-only package ``tzdata`` as a fallback for when system
data is not available.  The ``tzdata`` package would be distributed on PyPI as
a "first party" package, maintained by the CPython development team.

The ``tzdata`` package contains only data and metadata, with no public-facing
functions or classes.  It will be designed to be compatible with both newer
``importlib.resources`` [#importlib_resources]_ access patterns and older
access patterns like ``pkgutil.get_data`` [#pkgutil_data]_ .

While it is designed explicitly for the use of CPython, the ``tzdata`` package
is intended as a public package in its own right, and it may be used as an
"official" source of time zone data for third party Python packages.

.. _search-path-config:

Search path configuration
-------------------------

The time zone search path is very system-dependent, and sometimes even
application-dependent, and as such it makes sense to provide options to
customize it.  This PEP provides for three such avenues for customization:

1. Global configuration via a compile-time option
2. Per-run configuration via environment variables
3. Runtime configuration change via a ``reset_tzpath`` function

Compile-time options
####################

It is most likely that downstream distributors will know exactly where their
system time zone data is deployed, and so a compile-time option
``PYTHONTZPATH`` will be provided to set the default search path.

The ``PYTHONTZPATH`` option should be a string delimited by ``os.pathsep``,
listing possible locations for the time zone data to be deployed (e.g.
``/usr/share/zoneinfo``).

Environment variables
#####################

When initializing ``TZPATH`` (and whenever ``reset_tzpath`` is called with no
arguments), the ``zoneinfo`` module will use the environment variable
``PYTHONTZPATH``, if it exists, to set the search path.

``PYTHONTZPATH`` is an ``os.pathsep``-delimited string which *replaces* (rather
than augments) the default time zone path. Some examples of the proposed
semantics::

    $ python print_tzpath.py
    ("/usr/share/zoneinfo",
     "/usr/lib/zoneinfo",
     "/usr/share/lib/zoneinfo",
     "/etc/zoneinfo")

    $ PYTHONTZPATH="/etc/zoneinfo:/usr/share/zoneinfo" python print_tzpath.py
    ("/etc/zoneinfo",
     "/usr/share/zoneinfo")

    $ PYTHONTZPATH="" python print_tzpath.py
    ()

This provides no built-in mechanism for prepending or appending to the default
search path, as these use cases are likely to be somewhat more niche. It should
be possible to populate an environment variable with the default search path
fairly easily::

    $ export DEFAULT_TZPATH=$(python -c \
        "import os, zoneinfo; print(os.pathsep.join(zoneinfo.TZPATH))")

``reset_tzpath`` function
#########################

``zoneinfo`` provides a ``reset_tzpath`` function that allows for changing the
search path at runtime.

.. code-block::

    def reset_tzpath(
        to: Optional[Sequence[Union[str, os.PathLike]]] = None
    ) -> None:
        ...

When called with a sequence of paths, this function sets ``zoneinfo.TZPATH`` to
a tuple constructed from the desired value.  When called with no arguments or
``None``, this function resets ``zoneinfo.TZPATH`` to the default
configuration.

This is likely to be primarily useful for (permanently or temporarily)
disabling the use of system time zone paths and forcing the module to use the
``tzdata`` package.  It is not likely that ``reset_tzpath`` will be a common
operation, save perhaps in test functions sensitive to time zone configuration,
but it seems preferable to provide an official mechanism for changing this
rather than allowing a proliferation of hacks around the immutability of
``TZPATH``.

.. caution::

    Although changing ``TZPATH`` during a run is a supported operation, users
    should be advised that doing so may occasionally lead to unusual semantics,
    and when making design trade-offs greater weight will be afforded to using
    a static ``TZPATH``, which is the much more common use case.

As noted in Constructors_, the primary ``ZoneInfo`` constructor employs a cache
to ensure that two identically-constructed ``ZoneInfo`` objects always compare
as identical (i.e. ``ZoneInfo(key) is ZoneInfo(key)``), and the nature of this
cache is implementation-defined.  This means that the behavior of the
``ZoneInfo`` constructor may be unpredictably inconsistent in some situations
when used with the same ``key`` under different values of ``TZPATH``. For
example::

    >>> reset_tzpath(to=["/my/custom/tzdb"])
    >>> a = ZoneInfo("My/Custom/Zone")
    >>> reset_tzpath()
    >>> b = ZoneInfo("My/Custom/Zone")
    >>> del a
    >>> del b
    >>> c = ZoneInfo("My/Custom/Zone")

In this example, ``My/Custom/Zone`` exists only in the ``/my/custom/tzdb`` and
not on the default search path.  In all implementations the constructor for
``a`` must succeed.  It is implementation-defined whether the constructor for
``b`` succeeds, but if it does, it must be true that ``a is b``, because both
``a`` and ``b`` are references to the same key. It is also
implementation-defined whether the constructor for ``c`` succeeds.
Implementations of ``zoneinfo`` *may* return the object constructed in previous
constructor calls, or they may fail with an exception.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

This will have no backwards compatibility issues as it will create a new API.

With only minor modification, a backport with support for Python 3.6+ of the
``zoneinfo`` module could be created.

The ``tzdata`` package is designed to be "data only", and should support any
version of Python that it can be built for (including Python 2.7).


Security Implications
=====================

This will require parsing zoneinfo data from disk, mostly from system locations
but potentially from user-supplied data.  Errors in the implementation
(particularly the C code) could cause potential security issues, but there is
no special risk relative to parsing other file types.

Reference Implementation
========================

An initial reference implementation is available at
https://github.com/pganssle/zoneinfo

This may eventually be converted into a backport for 3.6+.

Rejected Ideas
==============

Building a custom tzdb compiler
-------------------------------

One major concern with the use of the TZif format is that it does not actually
contain enough information to always correctly determine the value to return
for ``tzinfo.dst()``.  This is because for any given time zone offset, TZif
only marks the UTC offset and whether or not it represents a DST offset, but
``tzinfo.dst()`` returns the total amount of the DST shift, so that the
"standard" offset can be reconstructed from ``datetime.utcoffset() -
datetime.dst()``.  The value to use for ``dst()`` can be determined by finding
the equivalent STD offset and calculating the difference, but the TZif format
does not specify which offsets form STD/DST pairs, and so heuristics must be
used to determine this.

One common heuristic — looking at the most recent standard offset — notably
fails in the case of the time zone changes in Portugal in 1992 and 1996, where
the "standard" offset was shifted by 1 hour during a DST transition, leading to
a transition from STD to DST status with no change in offset.  In fact, it is
possible (though it has never happened) for a time zone to be created that is
permanently DST and has no standard offsets.

Although this information is missing in the compiled TZif binaries, it is
present in the raw tzdb files, and it would be possible to parse this
information ourselves and create a more suitable binary format.

This idea was rejected for several reasons:

1. It precludes the use of any system-deployed time zone information, which is
   usually present only in TZif format.

2. The raw tzdb format, while stable, is *less* stable than the TZif format;
   some downstream tzdb parsers have already run into problems with old
   deployments of their custom parsers becoming incompatible with recent tzdb
   releases, leading to the creation of a "rearguard" format to ease the
   transition. [#rearguard]_

3. Heuristics currently suffice in ``dateutil`` and ``pytz`` for all known time
   zones, historical and present, and it is not very likely that new time zones
   will appear that cannot be captured by heuristics — though it is somewhat
   more likely that new rules that are not captured by the *current* generation
   of heuristics will appear; in that case, bugfixes would be required to
   accommodate the changed situation.

4. The ``dst()`` method's utility (and in fact the ``isdst`` parameter in TZif)
   is somewhat questionable to start with, as almost all the useful information
   is contained in the ``utcoffset()`` and ``tzname()`` methods, which are not
   subject to the same problems.

In short, maintaining a custom tzdb compiler or compiled package adds
maintenance burdens to both the CPython dev team and system administrators, and
its main benefit is to address a hypothetical failure that would likely have
minimal real world effects were it to occur.

.. _why-no-default-tzdata:

Including ``tzdata`` in the standard library by default
-------------------------------------------------------

Although PEP 453 [#pep453-ensurepip]_, which introduced the ``ensurepip``
mechanism to CPython, provides a convenient template for a standard library
module maintained on PyPI, a potentially similar ``ensuretzdata`` mechanism is
somewhat less necessary, and would be complicated enough that it is considered
out of scope for this PEP.

Because the ``zoneinfo`` module is designed to use the system time zone data
wherever possible, the ``tzdata`` package is unnecessary (and may be
undesirable) on systems that deploy time zone data, and so it does not seem
critical to ship ``tzdata`` with CPython.

It is also not yet clear how these hybrid standard library / PyPI modules
should be updated, (other than ``pip``, which has a natural mechanism for
updates and notifications) and since it is not critical to the operation of the
module, it seems prudent to defer any such proposal.

Support for leap seconds
------------------------

In addition to time zone offset and name rules, the IANA time zone database
also provides a source of leap second data. This is deemed out of scope because
``datetime.datetime`` currently has no support for leap seconds, and the
question of leap second data can be deferred until leap second support is
added.

The first-party ``tzdata`` package should ship the leap second data, even if it
is not used by the ``zoneinfo`` module.

Using a ``pytz``-like interface
-------------------------------

A ``pytz``-like ([#pytz]_) interface was proposed in PEP 431 [#pep431]_, but
was ultimately withdrawn / rejected for lack of ambiguous datetime support.
PEP 495 [#pep495]_ added the ``fold`` attribute to address this problem, but
``fold`` obviates the need for ``pytz``'s non-standard ``tzinfo`` classes, and
so a ``pytz``-like interface is no longer necessary. [#fastest-footgun]_

The ``zoneinfo`` approach is more closely based on ``dateutil.tz``, which
implemented support for ``fold`` (including a backport to older versions) just
before the release of Python 3.6.


Open Issues
===========

Using the ``datetime`` module
-----------------------------

One possible idea would be to add ``ZoneInfo`` to the ``datetime`` module,
rather than giving it its own separate module. In the current version of the
PEP, this has been resolved in favor of using a separate module, for the
reasons detailed below, but the use of a nested submodule ``datetime.zoneinfo``
is also under consideration.

Arguments against putting ``ZoneInfo`` directly into ``datetime``
#################################################################

The ``datetime`` module is already somewhat crowded, as it has many classes
with somewhat complex behavior — ``datetime.datetime``, ``datetime.date``,
``datetime.time``, ``datetime.timedelta``, ``datetime.timezone`` and
``datetime.tzinfo``.  The module's implementation and documentation are already
quite complicated, and it is probably beneficial to try to not to compound the
problem if it can be helped.

The ``ZoneInfo`` class is also in some ways different from all the other
classes provided by ``datetime``; the other classes are all intended to be
lean, simple data types, whereas the ``ZoneInfo`` class is more complex: it is
a parser for a specific format (TZif), a representation for the information
stored in that format and a mechanism to look up the information in well-known
locations in the system.

Finally, while it is true that someone who needs the ``zoneinfo`` module also
needs the ``datetime`` module, the reverse is not necessarily true: many people
will want to use ``datetime`` without ``zoneinfo``.  Considering that
``zoneinfo`` will likely pull in additional, possibly more heavy-weight
standard library modules, it would be preferable to allow the two to be
imported separately — particularly if potential "tree shaking" distributions
are in Python's future. [#tree-shaking]_

In the final analysis, it makes sense to keep ``zoneinfo`` a separate module
with a separate documentation page rather than to put its classes and functions
directly into ``datetime``.

Using ``datetime.zoneinfo`` instead of ``zoneinfo``
###################################################

A more palatable configuration may be to nest ``zoneinfo`` as a module under
``datetime``, as ``datetime.zoneinfo``.

Arguments in favor of this:

1. It neatly namespaces ``zoneinfo`` together with ``datetime``

2. The ``timezone`` class is already in ``datetime``, and it may seem strange
   that some time zones are in ``datetime`` and others are in a top-level
   module.

3. As mentioned earlier, importing ``zoneinfo`` necessarily requires importing
   ``datetime``, so it is no imposition to require importing the parent module.

Arguments against this:

1. In order to avoid forcing all ``datetime`` users to import ``zoneinfo``, the
   ``zoneinfo`` module would need to be lazily imported, which means that
   end-users would need to explicitly import ``datetime.zoneinfo`` (as opposed
   to importing ``datetime`` and accessing the ``zoneinfo`` attribute on the
   module). This is the way ``dateutil`` works (all submodules are lazily
   imported), and it is a perennial source of confusion for end users.

   This confusing requirement from end-users can be avoided using a
   module-level ``__getattr__`` and ``__dir__`` per PEP 562, but this would
   add some complexity to the implementation of the ``datetime`` module. This
   sort of behavior in modules or classes tends to confuse static analysis
   tools, which may not be desirable for a library as widely-used and critical
   as ``datetime``.

2. Nesting the implementation under ``datetime`` would likely require
   ``datetime`` to be reorganized from a single-file module (``datetime.py``)
   to a directory with an ``__init__.py``.  This is a minor concern, but the
   structure of the ``datetime`` module has been stable for many years, and it
   would be preferable to avoid churn if possible.

   This concern *could* be alleviated by implementing ``zoneinfo`` as
   ``_zoneinfo.py`` and importing it as ``zoneinfo`` from within ``datetime``,
   but this does not seem desirable from an aesthetic or code organization
   standpoint, and it would preclude the version of nesting where end users are
   required to explicitly import ``datetime.zoneinfo``.

This PEP currently takes the position that on balance it would be best to use a
separate top-level ``zoneinfo`` module because the benefits of nesting are not
so great that it overwhelms the practical implementation concerns, but this
still requires some discussion.


Structure of the ``PYTHON_TZPATH`` environment variable
=======================================================

This PEP proposes to use a single environment variable: ``PYTHONTZPATH``.
This is based on the assumption that the majority of
users who would want to manipulate the time zone path would want to fully
replace it (e.g. "I know exactly where my time zone data is"), and other
use cases like prepending to the existing search path would be less common.

There are several other schemes that were considered and weakly rejected:

1. Separate ``PYTHON_TZPATH`` into two environment variables:
   ``DEFAULT_PYTHONTZPATH`` and ``PYTHONTZPATH``, where ``PYTHONTZPATH`` would
   contain values to append (or prepend) to the default time zone path, and
   ``DEFAULT_PYTHONTZPATH`` would *replace* the default time zone path. This
   was rejected because it would likely lead to user confusion if the primary
   use case is to replace rather than augment.

2. Adding either ``PYTHONTZPATH_PREPEND``, ``PYTHONTZPATH_APPEND`` or both, so
   that users can augment the search path on either end without attempting to
   determine what the default time zone path is. This was rejected as likely to
   be unnecessary, and because it could easily be added in a
   backwards-compatible manner in future updates if there is much demand for
   such a feature.

3. Use only the ``PYTHONTZPATH`` variable, but provide a custom special value
   that represents the default time zone path, e.g. ``<<DEFAULT_TZPATH>>``, so
   users could append to the time zone path with, e.g.
   ``PYTHONTZPATH=<<DEFAULT_TZPATH>>:/my/path`` could be used to append
   ``/my/path`` to the end of the time zone path.

   This was rejected mainly because these sort of special values are not
   usually found in ``PATH``-like variables, and it would be hard to discover
   mistakes in your implementation.

   One advantage to this scheme would be that it would add a natural extension
   point for specifying non-file-based elements on the search path, such as
   changing the priority of ``tzdata`` if it exists, or if native support for
   TZDIST [#rfc7808]_ were to be added to the library in the future.

Windows support via Microsoft's ICU API
=======================================

Windows does not ship the time zone database as TZif files, but as of Windows
10's 2017 Creators Update, Microsoft has provided an API for interacting with
the International Components for Unicode (ICU) project [#icu-project]_
[#ms-icu-documentation]_ , which includes an API for accessing time zone data —
sourced from the IANA time zone database. [#icu-timezone-api]_

Providing bindings for this would allow for a mostly seamless cross-platform
experience for users on sufficiently recent versions of Windows — even without
falling back to the ``tzdata`` package.

This is a promising area, but is less mature than the remainder of the proposal,
and so there are several open issues with regards to Windows support:

1. None of the popular third party time zone libraries provide support for ICU
   (``dateutil``'s native windows time zone support relies on legacy time zones
   provided in the Windows Registry [#dateutil-tzwin]_, which would be
   unsuitable as a drop-in replacement for TZif files), so this would need to
   be developed *de novo* in the standard library, rather than first maturing
   in the third party ecosystem.
2. The most likely implementation for this would be to have ``TZPATH`` default
   to empty on Windows and have a search path precedence of ``TZPATH`` > ICU
   > ``tzdata``, but this prevents end users from forcing the use of ``tzdata``
   by setting an empty ``TZPATH``.

   Two possible solutions for this are:

   1. Add a mechanism to disable ICU globally independent of setting
      ``TZPATH``.
   2. Add a cross-platform mechanism to give ``tzdata`` the highest
      precedence.
3. This is not part of the reference implementation and it is uncertain whether
   it can be ready and vetted in time for the Python 3.9 feature freeze. It is
   an open question whether a failure to implement native Windows support in
   3.9 should defer the release of ``zoneinfo`` or if only the ICU-based
   Windows support should be deferred.


Footnotes
=========

.. [a]
    The claim that the vast majority of users only want a few types of time
    zone is based on anecdotal impressions rather than anything remotely
    scientific.  As one data point, ``dateutil`` provides many time zone types,
    but user support mostly focuses on these three types.

.. [b]
    The statement that identically constructed ``ZoneInfo`` files should be
    identical objects may be violated if the user deliberately clears the time
    zone cache.

References
==========

.. [#rfc6557]
    RFC 6557: Procedures for Maintaining the Time Zone Database
    https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6557

.. [#rfc7808]
    RFC 7808: Time Zone Data Distribution Service
    https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7808

.. [#rfc8536]
    RFC 8636: The Time Zone Information Format (TZif)
    https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8536

.. [#nontransitive_comp]
    Paul Ganssle: "A curious case of non-transitive datetime comparison"
    (Published 15 February 2018)
    https://blog.ganssle.io/articles/2018/02/a-curious-case-datetimes.html

.. [#fastest-footgun]
    Paul Ganssle: "pytz: The Fastest Footgun in the West" (Published 19 March
    2018) https://blog.ganssle.io/articles/2018/03/pytz-fastest-footgun.html

.. [#cldr]
    CLDR: Unicode Common Locale Data Repository
    http://cldr.unicode.org/#TOC-How-to-Use-

.. [#tzdb-wiki]
    Wikipedia page for Tz database:
    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tz_database

.. [#timing-of-tz-changes]
    Code of Matt: "On the Timing of Time Zone Changes" (Matt Johnson-Pint, 23
    April 2016) https://codeofmatt.com/on-the-timing-of-time-zone-changes/

.. [#rearguard]
    tz mailing list: [PROPOSED] Support zi parsers that mishandle negative DST
    offsets (Paul Eggert, 23 April 2018)
    https://mm.icann.org/pipermail/tz/2018-April/026421.html

.. [#tree-shaking]
    "Russell Keith-Magee: Python On Other Platforms" (15 May 2019, Jesse Jiryu
    Davis)
    https://pyfound.blogspot.com/2019/05/russell-keith-magee-python-on-other.html

.. [#pep453-ensurepip]
    PEP 453: Explicit bootstrapping of pip in Python installations
    https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0453/

.. [#pep431]
    PEP 431: Time zone support improvements
    https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0431/

.. [#pep495]
    PEP 495: Local Time Disambiguation
    https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0495/

.. [#tzinfo]
    ``datetime.tzinfo`` documentation
    https://docs.python.org/3/library/datetime.html#datetime.tzinfo

.. [#importlib_resources]
    ``importlib.resources`` documentation
    https://docs.python.org/3/library/importlib.html#module-importlib.resources

.. [#pkgutil_data]
    ``pkgutil.get_data`` documentation
    https://docs.python.org/3/library/pkgutil.html#pkgutil.get_data

.. [#icu-project]
    ICU TimeZone classes
    http://userguide.icu-project.org/datetime/timezone

.. [#ms-icu-documentation]
    Microsoft documentation for International Components for Unicode (ICU)
    `https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/intl/international-components-for-unicode--icu- <https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/intl/international-components-for-unicode--icu->`_

.. [#icu-timezone-api]
    ``icu::TimeZone`` class documentation
    https://unicode-org.github.io/icu-docs/apidoc/released/icu4c/classicu_1_1TimeZone.html


Other time zone implementations:
--------------------------------

.. [#dateutil-tz]
    ``dateutil.tz``
    https://dateutil.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tz.html

.. [#dateutil-tzwin]
    ``dateutil.tz.win``: Concreate time zone implementations wrapping Windows
    time zones
    https://dateutil.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tzwin.html

.. [#pytz]
    ``pytz``
    http://pytz.sourceforge.net/


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.



..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
