PEP: 718
Title: Subscriptable functions
Author: James Hilton-Balfe <gobot1234yt@gmail.com>
Sponsor: Guido van Rossum <guido@python.org>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/26463/
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Typing
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 23-Jun-2023
Python-Version: 3.13
Post-History: `24-Jun-2023 <https://discuss.python.org/t/28457/>`__

Abstract
--------

This PEP proposes making function objects subscriptable for typing purposes. Doing so
gives developers explicit control over the types produced by the type checker where
bi-directional inference (which allows for the types of parameters of anonymous
functions to be inferred) and other methods than specialisation are insufficient.

Motivation
----------

Currently, it is not possible to infer the type parameters to generic functions in
certain situations where unspecialised literals are involved:

.. code-block:: python

   def make_list[T](*args: T) -> list[T]: ...
   reveal_type(make_list())  # type checker cannot infer T

Making instances of ``FunctionType`` subscriptable would allow for this constructor to
be typed:

.. code-block:: python

   reveal_type(make_list[int]())  # type is list[int]

Currently you have to use an assignment to provide a precise type:

.. code-block:: python

   x: list[int] = make_list()
   reveal_type(x)  # type is list[int]

but this code is unnecessarily verbose taking up multiple lines for a simple function
call.

Similarly, this example cannot currently be annotated correctly without an extra assignment:

.. code-block:: python

   def factory[T](func: Callable[[T], Any]) -> Foo[T]: ...

If function objects were subscriptable, however, the following code could be used:

.. code-block:: python

   reveal_type(factory[int](lambda x: "Hello World" * x))  # type is Foo[int]

Currently, with unspecialised literals, it is not possible to determine a type for
situations similar to:

.. code-block:: python

   def foo[T](x: list[T]) -> T: ...
   reveal_type(foo([]))  # type checker cannot infer T (yet again)

.. code-block:: python

   reveal_type(foo[int]([]))  # type is int

It is also useful to be able to specify in cases in which a certain type must be passed
to a function beforehand:

.. code-block:: python

   words = ["hello", "world"]
   foo[int](words)  # Invalid: list[str] is incompatible with list[int]

Allowing subscription makes functions and methods consistent with generic classes where
they weren't already. Whilst all of the proposed changes can be implemented using
callable generic classes, syntactic sugar would be highly welcome.

Due to this, specialising the function and using it as a new factory is fine

.. code-block:: python

   make_int_list = make_list[int]
   reveal_type(make_int_list())  # type is list[int]

This proposal also opens the door to
`monomorphisation <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monomorphization>`_ and
`reified types <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reification_(computer_science)>`_

Rationale
---------

Function objects in this PEP is used to refer to ``FunctionType``\ , ``MethodType``\ ,
``BuiltinFunctionType``\ , ``BuiltinMethodType`` and ``MethodWrapperType``\ .

For ``MethodType`` you should be able to write:

.. code-block:: python

   class Foo:
       def make_list[T](self, *args: T) -> list[T]: ...

   Foo().make_list[int]()

and have it work similarly to a ``FunctionType``.

For ``BuiltinFunctionType``, so builtin generic functions (e.g. ``max`` and ``min``)
work like ones defined in Python. In general it's good for built-in functions to behave
as much like functions implemented in Python as possible.

``BuiltinMethodType`` is the same type as ``BuiltinFunctionType`` so should behave the
same.

``MethodWrapperType`` (e.g. the type of ``object().__str__``) would be useful for some
generic magic methods.

Specification
-------------

Function objects should implement ``__getitem__`` to allow for subscription at runtime
and return an instance of ``types.GenericAlias`` with ``__origin__`` set as the
callable and ``__args__`` as the types passed.

Type checkers should support subscripting functions and understand that the parameters
passed to the function subscription should follow the same rules as a generic callable
class.

Setting ``__orig_class__``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Currently, ``__orig_class__`` is an attribute set in ``GenericAlias.__call__`` to the
instance of the ``GenericAlias`` that created the called class e.g.

.. code-block:: python

   class Foo[T]: ...

   assert Foo[int]().__orig_class__ == Foo[int]

Currently, ``__orig_class__`` is unconditionally set; however, to avoid potential
erasure on any created instances, this attribute should not be set if ``__origin__`` is
an instance of any function object.

The following code snippet would fail at runtime without this change as
``__orig_class__`` would be ``bar[str]`` and not ``Foo[int]``.

.. code-block:: python

   def bar[U]():
       return Foo[int]()

   assert bar[str]().__orig_class__  is Foo[int]

Backwards Compatibility
-----------------------
Currently these classes are not subclassable and so there are no backwards
compatibility concerns with regards to classes already implementing
``__getitem__``.

Reference Implementation
------------------------

The runtime changes proposed can be found here
https://github.com/Gobot1234/cpython/tree/function-subscript

Acknowledgements
----------------

Thank you to Alex Waygood and Jelle Zijlstra for their feedback on this PEP and Guido
for some motivating examples.

Copyright
---------

This document is placed in the public domain or under the CC0-1.0-Universal license,
whichever is more permissive.
