PEP: 8000
Title: Python Language Governance Proposal Overview
Author: Barry Warsaw <barry@python.org>
Status: Active
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 2018-08-24


Abstract
========

This PEP provides an overview of the selection process for a new model of
Python language governance in the wake of `Guido's retirement
<https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-committers/2018-July/005664.html>`_.
Once the governance model is selected, it will be codified in PEP 13.

Here is a list of PEPs related to the governance model selection process.
PEPs in the lower 8000s describe the general process for selecting a
governance model.

* PEP 8001 - Python Governance Voting Process

  This PEP describes how the vote for the new governance model will be
  conducted.  It outlines the voting method, timeline, criteria for
  participation, and explicit list of eligible voters.

* PEP 8002 - Open Source Governance Survey

  Surveys will be conducted of governance models for similar open source and
  free software projects, and summaries of these models will be outlined in
  this PEP.  These surveys will serve as useful barometers for how such
  projects can be successfully governed, and may serve as inspiration for
  Python's own governance model.  Python is unique, so it's expected that it
  will have its own spin on governance, rather than directly adopting any of
  those surveyed.

PEPs in the 801Xs describe the actual proposals for Python governance.  It is
expected that these PEPs will cover the broad scope of governance, and that
differences in details (such as the size of a governing council) will be
covered in the same PEP, rather than in potentially vote-splitting individual
PEPs.

* PEP 8010 - The Technical Leader Governance Model

  This PEP proposes a continuation of the singular technical project
  leader model.  Also within scope is whether an advisory council aids
  or supports the BDFL.  This PEP does *not* name either the next
  BDFL, nor members of such an advisory council.  For that, see PEP
  13.

* PEP 8011 - Python Governance Model Lead by Trio of Pythonistas

  This PEP describes a new model of Python governance lead by a Trio of Pythonistas
  (TOP).  It describes the role and responsibilities of the Trio.
  This PEP does *not* name members of the Trio.  For that, see PEP 13.

* PEP 8012 - The Community Governance Model

  This is a placeholder PEP for a new model of Python governance based on
  consensus and voting, without the role of a centralized singular leader or a
  governing council.  It describes how, when, and why votes are conducted for
  decisions affecting the Python language.  It also describes the criteria for
  voting eligibility.

* PEP 8013 - The External Governance Model

  This PEP describes a new model of Python governance based on an external
  council who are responsible for ensuring good process.  Elected by the core
  development team, this council may reject proposals that are not
  sufficiently detailed, do not consider all affected users, or are not
  appropriate for the upcoming release.  This PEP does *not* name members of
  such a council.  For that, see PEP 13.

* PEP 8014 - The Commons Governance Model

  This PEP describes a new model of Python governance based on a council of
  elders who are responsible for ensuring a PEP is supported by a sufficient
  majority of the Python community before being accepted. Unlike some of the
  other governance PEPs it explicitly does *not* specify who has voting
  rights and what a majority vote consists of. In stead this is determined
  by the council of elders on a case-by-case basis.

* PEP 8015 - Organization of the Python community

  This PEP formalizes the current organization of the Python community
  and proposes 3 main changes: formalize the existing concept of
  "Python teams"; give more autonomy to Python teams; replace the BDFL
  (Guido van Rossum) with a new "Python board" of 3 members which has
  limited roles, mostly decide how a PEP is approved (or rejected).

* PEP 8016 - The Steering Council Model

  This PEP proposes a model of Python governance based around a
  steering council. The council has broad authority, which they seek
  to exercise as rarely as possible; instead, they use this power to
  establish standard processes, like those proposed in the other
  801x-series PEPs.  This follows the general philosophy that it's
  better to split up large changes into a series of small changes that
  can be reviewed independently: instead of trying to do everything in
  one PEP, we focus on providing a minimal-but-solid foundation for
  further governance decisions.

Additional governance models may be added before the final selection.


Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.



..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
