pep-0683.rst, before:

PEP: 683
Title: Immortal Objects, Using a Fixed Refcount
Author: Eric Snow <ericsnowcurrently@gmail.com>, Eddie Elizondo <eduardo.elizondorueda@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: python-dev@python.org
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 10-Feb-2022
Python-Version: 3.11
Post-History:
Resolution:


Abstract
========

Under this proposal, any object may be marked as immortal.
"Immortal" means the object will never be cleaned up (at least until
runtime finalization).  Specifically, the `refcount`_ for an immortal
object is set to a sentinel value, and that refcount is never changed
by ``Py_INCREF()``, ``Py_DECREF()``, or ``Py_SET_REFCNT()``.
For immortal containers, the ``PyGC_Head`` is never
changed by the garbage collector.

Avoiding changes to the refcount is an essential part of this
proposal.  For what we call "immutable" objects, it makes them
truly immutable.  As described further below, this allows us
to avoid performance penalties in scenarios that
would otherwise be prohibitive.

This proposal is CPython-specific and, effectively, describes
internal implementation details.

.. _refcount: https://docs.python.org/3.11/c-api/intro.html#reference-counts


Motivation
==========

Without immortal objects, all objects are effectively mutable.  That
includes "immutable" objects like ``None`` and ``str`` instances.
This is because every object's refcount is frequently modified
as it is used during execution.  In addition, for containers
the runtime may modify the object's ``PyGC_Head``.  These
runtime-internal state currently prevent
full immutability.

This has a concrete impact on active projects in the Python community.
Below we describe several ways in which refcount modification has
a real negative effect on those projects.  None of that would
happen for objects that are truly immutable.

Reducing Cache Invalidation
---------------------------

Every modification of a refcount causes the corresponding cache
line to be invalidated.  This has a number of effects.

For one, the write must be propagated to other cache levels
and to main memory.  This has small effect on all Python programs.
Immortal objects would provide a slight relief in that regard.

On top of that, multi-core applications pay a price.  If two threads
are interacting with the same object (e.g. ``None``)  then they will
end up invalidating each other's caches with each incref and decref.
This is true even for otherwise immutable objects like ``True``,
``0``, and ``str`` instances.  This is also true even with
the GIL, though the impact is smaller.

Avoiding Data Races
-------------------

Speaking of multi-core, we are considering making the GIL
a per-interpreter lock, which would enable true multi-core parallelism.
Among other things, the GIL currently protects against races between
multiple threads that concurrently incref or decref.  Without a shared
GIL, two running interpreters could not safely share any objects,
even otherwise immutable ones like ``None``.

This means that, to have a per-interpreter GIL, each interpreter must
have its own copy of *every* object, including the singletons and
static types.  We have a viable strategy for that but it will
require a meaningful amount of extra effort and extra
complexity.

The alternative is to ensure that all shared objects are truly immutable.
There would be no races because there would be no modification.  This
is something that the immortality proposed here would enable for
otherwise immutable objects.  With immortal objects,
support for a per-interpreter GIL
becomes much simpler.

Avoiding Copy-on-Write
----------------------

For some applications it makes sense to get the application into
a desired initial state and then fork the process for each worker.
This can result in a large performance improvement, especially
memory usage.  Several enterprise Python users (e.g. Instagram,
YouTube) have taken advantage of this.  However, the above
refcount semantics drastically reduce the benefits and
has led to some sub-optimal workarounds.

Also note that "fork" isn't the only operating system mechanism
that uses copy-on-write semantics.


Rationale
=========

The proposed solution is obvious enough that two people came to the
same conclusion (and implementation, more or less) independently.
Other designs were also considered.  Several possibilities
have also been discussed on python-dev in past years.

Alternatives include:

* use a high bit to mark "immortal" but do not change ``Py_INCREF()``
* add an explicit flag to objects
* implement via the type (``tp_dealloc()`` is a no-op)
* track via the object's type object
* track with a separate table

Each of the above makes objects immortal, but none of them address
the performance penalties from refcount modification described above.

In the case of per-interpreter GIL, the only realistic alternative
is to move all global objects into ``PyInterpreterState`` and add
one or more lookup functions to access them.  Then we'd have to
add some hacks to the C-API to preserve compatibility for the
may objects exposed there.  The story is much, much simpler
with immortal objects


Impact
======

Benefits
--------

Most notably, the cases described in the two examples above stand
to benefit greatly from immortal objects.  Projects using pre-fork
can drop their workarounds.  For the per-interpreter GIL project,
immortal objects greatly simplifies the solution for existing static
types, as well as objects exposed by the public C-API.

In general, a strong immutability guarantee for objects enables Python
applications to scale like never before.  This is because they can
then leverage multi-core parallelism without a tradeoff in memory
usage.  This is reflected in most of the above cases.


Performance
-----------

A naive implementation shows `a 4% slowdown`_.
Several promising mitigation strategies will be pursued in the effort
to bring it closer to performance-neutral.

On the positive side, immortal objects save a significant amount of
memory when used with a pre-fork model.  Also, immortal objects provide
opportunities for specialization in the eval loop that would improve
performance.

.. _a 4% slowdown: https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/19474#issuecomment-1032944709

Backward Compatibility
-----------------------

This proposal is completely compatible.  It is internal-only so no API
is changing.

The approach is also compatible with extensions compiled to the stable
ABI.  Unfortunately, they will modify the refcount and invalidate all
the performance benefits of immortal objects.  However, the high bit
of the refcount will still match ``_Py_IMMORTAL_REFCNT`` so we can
still identify such objects as immortal.

No user-facing behavior changes, with the following exceptions:

* code that inspects the refcount (e.g. ``sys.getrefcount()``
  or directly via ``ob_refcnt``) will see a really, really large
  value
* ``Py_SET_REFCNT()`` will be a no-op for immortal objects

Neither should cause a problem.

Alternate Python Implementations
--------------------------------

This proposal is CPython-specific.

Security Implications
---------------------

This feature has no known impact on security.

Maintainability
---------------

This is not a complex feature so it should not cause much mental
overhead for maintainers.  The basic implementation doesn't touch
much code so it should have much impact on maintainability.  There
may be some extra complexity due to performance penalty mitigation.
However, that should be limited to where we immortalize all
objects post-init and that code will be in one place.

Non-Obvious Consequences
------------------------

* immortal containers effectively immortalize each contained item
* the same is true for objects held internally by other objects
  (e.g. ``PyTypeObject.tp_subclasses``)
* an immortal object's type is effectively immortal
* though extremely unlikely (and technically hard), any object could
  be incref'ed enough to reach ``_Py_IMMORTAL_REFCNT`` and then
  be treated as immortal


Specification
=============

The approach involves these fundamental changes:

* add ``_Py_IMMORTAL_REFCNT`` (the magic value) to the internal C-API
* update ``Py_INCREF()`` and ``Py_DECREF()`` to no-op for objects with
  the magic refcount (or its most significant bit)
* do the same for any other API that modifies the refcount
* stop modifying ``PyGC_Head`` for immortal containers
* ensure that all immortal objects are cleaned up during
  runtime finalization

Then setting any object's refcount to ``_Py_IMMORTAL_REFCNT``
makes it immortal.

To be clear, we will likely use the most-significant bit of
``_Py_IMMORTAL_REFCNT`` to tell if an object is immortal, rather
than comparing with ``_Py_IMMORTAL_REFCNT`` directly.

(There are other minor, internal changes which are not described here.)

This is not meant to be a public feature but rather an internal one.
So the proposal does *not* including adding any new public C-API,
nor any Python API.  However, this does not prevent us from
adding (publicly accessible) private API to do things
like immortalize an object or tell if one
is immortal.

Affected API
------------

API that will now ignore immortal objects:

* (public) ``Py_INCREF()``
* (public) ``Py_DECREF()``
* (public) ``Py_SET_REFCNT()``
* (private) ``_Py_NewReference()``

API that exposes refcounts (unchanged but may now return large values):

* (public) ``Py_REFCNT()``
* (public) ``sys.getrefcount()``
* (public) ``sys.gettotalrefcount()``

Immortal Global Objects
-----------------------

The following objects will be made immortal:

* singletons (``None``, ``True``, ``False``, ``Ellipsis``, ``NotImplemented``)
* all static types (e.g. ``PyLong_Type``, ``PyExc_Exception``)
* all static objects in ``_PyRuntimeState.global_objects`` (e.g. identifiers,
  small ints)

There will likely be others we have not enumerated here.

Documentation
-------------

The feature itself is internal and will not be added to the documentation.

We *may* add a note about immortal objects to the following,
to help reduce any surprise users may have with the change:

* ``Py_SET_REFCNT()`` (a no-op for immortal objects)
* ``Py_REFCNT()`` (value may be surprisingly large)
* ``sys.getrefcount()`` (value may be surprisingly large)

Other API that might benefit from such notes are currently undocumented.

We wouldn't add a note anywhere else (including for ``Py_INCREF()`` and
``Py_DECREF()``) since the feature is otherwise transparent to users.


Rejected Ideas
==============

Equate Immortal with Immutable
------------------------------

Making a mutable object immortal isn't particularly helpful.
The exception is if you can ensure the object isn't actually
modified again.  Since we aren't enforcing any immutability
for immortal objects it didn't make sense to emphasis
that relationship.


Reference Implementation
========================

The implementation is proposed on GitHub:

https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/19474


Open Issues
===========

* how do we ensure all immortal objects get cleaned up during runtime finalization?
* how do we adjust ``sys.gettotalrefcount()`` to reflect things properly (for the sake of buildbots)?
* is there any other impact on GC?


References
==========

This was discussed in December 2021 on python-dev:

* https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/thread/7O3FUA52QGTVDC6MDAV5WXKNFEDRK5D6/#TBTHSOI2XRWRO6WQOLUW3X7S5DUXFAOV
* https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/thread/PNLBJBNIQDMG2YYGPBCTGOKOAVXRBJWY


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.



..
    Local Variables:
    mode: indented-text
    indent-tabs-mode: nil
    sentence-end-double-space: t
    fill-column: 70
    coding: utf-8
    End:

Commit message:

Explain cleanup in the Specification section.

pep-0683.rst, after:

PEP: 683
Title: Immortal Objects, Using a Fixed Refcount
Author: Eric Snow <ericsnowcurrently@gmail.com>, Eddie Elizondo <eduardo.elizondorueda@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: python-dev@python.org
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 10-Feb-2022
Python-Version: 3.11
Post-History:
Resolution:


Abstract
========

Under this proposal, any object may be marked as immortal.
"Immortal" means the object will never be cleaned up (at least until
runtime finalization).  Specifically, the `refcount`_ for an immortal
object is set to a sentinel value, and that refcount is never changed
by ``Py_INCREF()``, ``Py_DECREF()``, or ``Py_SET_REFCNT()``.
For immortal containers, the ``PyGC_Head`` is never
changed by the garbage collector.

Avoiding changes to the refcount is an essential part of this
proposal.  For what we call "immutable" objects, it makes them
truly immutable.  As described further below, this allows us
to avoid performance penalties in scenarios that
would otherwise be prohibitive.

This proposal is CPython-specific and, effectively, describes
internal implementation details.

.. _refcount: https://docs.python.org/3.11/c-api/intro.html#reference-counts


Motivation
==========

Without immortal objects, all objects are effectively mutable.  That
includes "immutable" objects like ``None`` and ``str`` instances.
This is because every object's refcount is frequently modified
as it is used during execution.  In addition, for containers
the runtime may modify the object's ``PyGC_Head``.  These
runtime-internal state currently prevent
full immutability.

This has a concrete impact on active projects in the Python community.
Below we describe several ways in which refcount modification has
a real negative effect on those projects.  None of that would
happen for objects that are truly immutable.

Reducing Cache Invalidation
---------------------------

Every modification of a refcount causes the corresponding cache
line to be invalidated.  This has a number of effects.

For one, the write must be propagated to other cache levels
and to main memory.  This has small effect on all Python programs.
Immortal objects would provide a slight relief in that regard.

On top of that, multi-core applications pay a price.  If two threads
are interacting with the same object (e.g. ``None``)  then they will
end up invalidating each other's caches with each incref and decref.
This is true even for otherwise immutable objects like ``True``,
``0``, and ``str`` instances.  This is also true even with
the GIL, though the impact is smaller.

Avoiding Data Races
-------------------

Speaking of multi-core, we are considering making the GIL
a per-interpreter lock, which would enable true multi-core parallelism.
Among other things, the GIL currently protects against races between
multiple threads that concurrently incref or decref.  Without a shared
GIL, two running interpreters could not safely share any objects,
even otherwise immutable ones like ``None``.

This means that, to have a per-interpreter GIL, each interpreter must
have its own copy of *every* object, including the singletons and
static types.  We have a viable strategy for that but it will
require a meaningful amount of extra effort and extra
complexity.

The alternative is to ensure that all shared objects are truly immutable.
There would be no races because there would be no modification.  This
is something that the immortality proposed here would enable for
otherwise immutable objects.  With immortal objects,
support for a per-interpreter GIL
becomes much simpler.

Avoiding Copy-on-Write
----------------------

For some applications it makes sense to get the application into
a desired initial state and then fork the process for each worker.
This can result in a large performance improvement, especially
memory usage.  Several enterprise Python users (e.g. Instagram,
YouTube) have taken advantage of this.  However, the above
refcount semantics drastically reduce the benefits and
has led to some sub-optimal workarounds.

Also note that "fork" isn't the only operating system mechanism
that uses copy-on-write semantics.


Rationale
=========

The proposed solution is obvious enough that two people came to the
same conclusion (and implementation, more or less) independently.
Other designs were also considered.  Several possibilities
have also been discussed on python-dev in past years.

Alternatives include:

* use a high bit to mark "immortal" but do not change ``Py_INCREF()``
* add an explicit flag to objects
* implement via the type (``tp_dealloc()`` is a no-op)
* track via the object's type object
* track with a separate table

Each of the above makes objects immortal, but none of them address
the performance penalties from refcount modification described above.

In the case of per-interpreter GIL, the only realistic alternative
is to move all global objects into ``PyInterpreterState`` and add
one or more lookup functions to access them.  Then we'd have to
add some hacks to the C-API to preserve compatibility for the
may objects exposed there.  The story is much, much simpler
with immortal objects


Impact
======

Benefits
--------

Most notably, the cases described in the two examples above stand
to benefit greatly from immortal objects.  Projects using pre-fork
can drop their workarounds.  For the per-interpreter GIL project,
immortal objects greatly simplifies the solution for existing static
types, as well as objects exposed by the public C-API.

In general, a strong immutability guarantee for objects enables Python
applications to scale like never before.  This is because they can
then leverage multi-core parallelism without a tradeoff in memory
usage.  This is reflected in most of the above cases.


Performance
-----------

A naive implementation shows `a 4% slowdown`_.
Several promising mitigation strategies will be pursued in the effort
to bring it closer to performance-neutral.

On the positive side, immortal objects save a significant amount of
memory when used with a pre-fork model.  Also, immortal objects provide
opportunities for specialization in the eval loop that would improve
performance.

.. _a 4% slowdown: https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/19474#issuecomment-1032944709

Backward Compatibility
-----------------------

This proposal is completely compatible.  It is internal-only so no API
is changing.

The approach is also compatible with extensions compiled to the stable
ABI.  Unfortunately, they will modify the refcount and invalidate all
the performance benefits of immortal objects.  However, the high bit
of the refcount will still match ``_Py_IMMORTAL_REFCNT`` so we can
still identify such objects as immortal.

No user-facing behavior changes, with the following exceptions:

* code that inspects the refcount (e.g. ``sys.getrefcount()``
  or directly via ``ob_refcnt``) will see a really, really large
  value
* ``Py_SET_REFCNT()`` will be a no-op for immortal objects

Neither should cause a problem.

Alternate Python Implementations
--------------------------------

This proposal is CPython-specific.

Security Implications
---------------------

This feature has no known impact on security.

Maintainability
---------------

This is not a complex feature so it should not cause much mental
overhead for maintainers.  The basic implementation doesn't touch
much code so it should have much impact on maintainability.  There
may be some extra complexity due to performance penalty mitigation.
However, that should be limited to where we immortalize all
objects post-init and that code will be in one place.

Non-Obvious Consequences
------------------------

* immortal containers effectively immortalize each contained item
* the same is true for objects held internally by other objects
  (e.g. ``PyTypeObject.tp_subclasses``)
* an immortal object's type is effectively immortal
* though extremely unlikely (and technically hard), any object could
  be incref'ed enough to reach ``_Py_IMMORTAL_REFCNT`` and then
  be treated as immortal


Specification
=============

The approach involves these fundamental changes:

* add ``_Py_IMMORTAL_REFCNT`` (the magic value) to the internal C-API
* update ``Py_INCREF()`` and ``Py_DECREF()`` to no-op for objects with
  the magic refcount (or its most significant bit)
* do the same for any other API that modifies the refcount
* stop modifying ``PyGC_Head`` for immortal containers
* ensure that all immortal objects are cleaned up during
  runtime finalization

Then setting any object's refcount to ``_Py_IMMORTAL_REFCNT``
makes it immortal.

To be clear, we will likely use the most-significant bit of
``_Py_IMMORTAL_REFCNT`` to tell if an object is immortal, rather
than comparing with ``_Py_IMMORTAL_REFCNT`` directly.

(There are other minor, internal changes which are not described here.)

This is not meant to be a public feature but rather an internal one.
So the proposal does *not* including adding any new public C-API,
nor any Python API.  However, this does not prevent us from
adding (publicly accessible) private API to do things
like immortalize an object or tell if one
is immortal.

Affected API
------------

API that will now ignore immortal objects:

* (public) ``Py_INCREF()``
* (public) ``Py_DECREF()``
* (public) ``Py_SET_REFCNT()``
* (private) ``_Py_NewReference()``

API that exposes refcounts (unchanged but may now return large values):

* (public) ``Py_REFCNT()``
* (public) ``sys.getrefcount()``
* (public) ``sys.gettotalrefcount()``

Immortal Global Objects
-----------------------

The following objects will be made immortal:

* singletons (``None``, ``True``, ``False``, ``Ellipsis``, ``NotImplemented``)
* all static types (e.g. ``PyLong_Type``, ``PyExc_Exception``)
* all static objects in ``_PyRuntimeState.global_objects`` (e.g. identifiers,
  small ints)

There will likely be others we have not enumerated here.

Object Cleanup
--------------

In order to clean up all immortal objects during runtime finalization,
we must keep track of them.

For container objects we'll leverage the GC's permanent generation by
pushing all immortalized containers there.  During runtime shutdown, the
strategy will be to first let the runtime try to do its best effort of
deallocating these instances normally.  Most of the module deallocation
will now be handled by pylifecycle.c:finalize_modules which cleans up
the remaining modules as best as we can.  It will change which modules
are available during __del__ but that's already defined as undefined
behavior by the docs.  Optionally, we could do some topological disorder
to guarantee that user modules will be deallocated first before the
stdlib modules.  Finally, anything leftover (if any) can be found
through the permanent generation gc list which we can clear after
finalize_modules.

For non-container objects, the tracking approach will vary on a
case-by-case basis.  In nearly every case, each such object is directly
accessible on the runtime state, e.g. in a ``_PyRuntimeState`` or
``PyInterpreterState`` field.  We may need to add a tracking mechanism
to the runtime state for a small number of objects.

Documentation
-------------

The feature itself is internal and will not be added to the documentation.

We *may* add a note about immortal objects to the following,
to help reduce any surprise users may have with the change:

* ``Py_SET_REFCNT()`` (a no-op for immortal objects)
* ``Py_REFCNT()`` (value may be surprisingly large)
* ``sys.getrefcount()`` (value may be surprisingly large)

Other API that might benefit from such notes are currently undocumented.

We wouldn't add a note anywhere else (including for ``Py_INCREF()`` and
``Py_DECREF()``) since the feature is otherwise transparent to users.


Rejected Ideas
==============

Equate Immortal with Immutable
------------------------------

Making a mutable object immortal isn't particularly helpful.
The exception is if you can ensure the object isn't actually
modified again.  Since we aren't enforcing any immutability
for immortal objects it didn't make sense to emphasis
that relationship.


Reference Implementation
========================

The implementation is proposed on GitHub:

https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/19474


Open Issues
===========

* how do we adjust ``sys.gettotalrefcount()`` to reflect things properly (for the sake of buildbots)?
* is there any other impact on GC?


References
==========

This was discussed in December 2021 on python-dev:

* https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/thread/7O3FUA52QGTVDC6MDAV5WXKNFEDRK5D6/#TBTHSOI2XRWRO6WQOLUW3X7S5DUXFAOV
* https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/thread/PNLBJBNIQDMG2YYGPBCTGOKOAVXRBJWY


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.



..
    Local Variables:
    mode: indented-text
    indent-tabs-mode: nil
    sentence-end-double-space: t
    fill-column: 70
    coding: utf-8
    End:
