pep-0012/pep-NNNN.rst, before:

PEP: <REQUIRED: pep number>
Title: <REQUIRED: pep title>
Author: <REQUIRED: list of authors' real names and optionally, email addrs>
Sponsor: <real name of sponsor>
PEP-Delegate: <PEP delegate's real name>
Discussions-To: <email address or URL>
Status: <REQUIRED: Draft | Active | Accepted | Provisional | Deferred | Rejected | Withdrawn | Final | Superseded>
Type: <REQUIRED: Standards Track | Informational | Process>
Requires: <pep numbers>
Created: <date created on, in dd-mmm-yyyy format>
Python-Version: <version number>
Post-History: <REQUIRED: dates of postings to python-ideas and/or python-dev, in dd-mmm-yyyy format>
Replaces: <pep number>
Superseded-By: <pep number>
Resolution: <url>


Abstract
========

[A short (~200 word) description of the technical issue being addressed.]


Motivation
==========

[Clearly explain why the existing language specification is inadequate to address the problem that the PEP solves.]


Rationale
=========

[Describe why particular design decisions were made.]


Specification
=============

[Describe the syntax and semantics of any new language feature.]


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

[Describe potential impact and severity on pre-existing code.]


Security Implications
=====================

[How could a malicious user take advantage of this new feature?]


How to Teach This
=================

[How to teach users, new and experienced, how to apply the PEP to their work.]


Reference Implementation
========================

[Link to any existing implementation and details about its state, e.g. proof-of-concept.]


Rejected Ideas
==============

[Why certain ideas that were brought while discussing this PEP were not ultimately pursued.]


Open Issues
===========

[Any points that are still being decided/discussed.]


References
==========

[A collection of URLs used as references through the PEP.]


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.



..
    Local Variables:
    mode: indented-text
    indent-tabs-mode: nil
    sentence-end-double-space: t
    fill-column: 70
    coding: utf-8
    End:

Commit message:

PEP 12: Recommend and further explain using RST links, not footnotes

pep-0012/pep-NNNN.rst, after:

PEP: <REQUIRED: pep number>
Title: <REQUIRED: pep title>
Author: <REQUIRED: list of authors' real names and optionally, email addrs>
Sponsor: <real name of sponsor>
PEP-Delegate: <PEP delegate's real name>
Discussions-To: <email address or URL>
Status: <REQUIRED: Draft | Active | Accepted | Provisional | Deferred | Rejected | Withdrawn | Final | Superseded>
Type: <REQUIRED: Standards Track | Informational | Process>
Requires: <pep numbers>
Created: <date created on, in dd-mmm-yyyy format>
Python-Version: <version number>
Post-History: <REQUIRED: dates of postings to python-ideas and/or python-dev, in dd-mmm-yyyy format>
Replaces: <pep number>
Superseded-By: <pep number>
Resolution: <url>


Abstract
========

[A short (~200 word) description of the technical issue being addressed.]


Motivation
==========

[Clearly explain why the existing language specification is inadequate to address the problem that the PEP solves.]


Rationale
=========

[Describe why particular design decisions were made.]


Specification
=============

[Describe the syntax and semantics of any new language feature.]


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

[Describe potential impact and severity on pre-existing code.]


Security Implications
=====================

[How could a malicious user take advantage of this new feature?]


How to Teach This
=================

[How to teach users, new and experienced, how to apply the PEP to their work.]


Reference Implementation
========================

[Link to any existing implementation and details about its state, e.g. proof-of-concept.]


Rejected Ideas
==============

[Why certain ideas that were brought while discussing this PEP were not ultimately pursued.]


Open Issues
===========

[Any points that are still being decided/discussed.]


References
==========

[A collection of footnotes referenced in the PEP, and a central place to list non-inline hyperlink targets.]


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.



..
    Local Variables:
    mode: indented-text
    indent-tabs-mode: nil
    sentence-end-double-space: t
    fill-column: 70
    coding: utf-8
    End:
