PEP: 725
Title: Specifying external dependencies in pyproject.toml
Author: Pradyun Gedam <pradyunsg@gmail.com>,
        Jaime Rodríguez-Guerra <jaime.rogue@gmail.com>,
        Ralf Gommers <ralf.gommers@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/31888
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Created: 17-Aug-2023
Post-History: `18-Aug-2023 <https://discuss.python.org/t/31888>`__


Abstract
========

This PEP specifies how to write a project's external, or non-PyPI, build and
runtime dependencies in a ``pyproject.toml`` file for packaging-related tools
to consume.

This PEP proposes to add an ``[external]`` table to ``pyproject.toml`` with
seven keys. "build-requires", "host-requires" and "dependencies"
are for specifying three types of *required* dependencies:

1. ``build-requires``, build tools to run on the build machine
2. ``host-requires``, build dependencies needed for the host machine but also needed at build time.
3. ``dependencies``, needed at runtime on the host machine but not needed at build time.

These three keys also have their *optional* ``external`` counterparts (``optional-build-requires``,
``optional-host-requires``, ``optional-dependencies``), which have the same role that
``project.optional-dependencies`` plays for ``project.dependencies``. Finally,
``dependency-groups`` offers the same functionality as :pep:`735` but for external
dependencies.

Cross compilation is taken into account by distinguishing between build and host dependencies.
Optional build-time and runtime dependencies are supported too, in a manner analogous
to how that is supported in the ``[project]`` table.


Motivation
==========

Python packages may have dependencies on build tools, libraries, command-line
tools, or other software that is not present on PyPI. Currently there is no way
to express those dependencies in standardized metadata
[#singular-vision-native-deps]_, [#pypacking-native-deps]_. Key motivators for
this PEP are to:

- Enable tools to automatically map external dependencies to packages in other
  packaging repositories,
- Make it possible to include needed dependencies in error messages emitted by
  Python package installers and build frontends,
- Provide a canonical place for package authors to record this dependency
  information.

Packaging ecosystems like Linux distros, conda, Homebrew, Spack, and Nix need
full sets of dependencies for Python packages, and have tools like pyp2spec_
(Fedora), Grayskull_ (conda), and dh_python_ (Debian) which attempt to
automatically generate dependency metadata for their own package managers from the metadata in
upstream Python packages. External dependencies are currently handled manually,
because there is no metadata for this in ``pyproject.toml`` or any other
standard location. Other tools resort to extracting dependencies from extension
modules and shared libraries inside Python packages, like elfdeps_ (Fedora).
Enabling automating this type of conversion by only using explicitly annotated metadata
is a key benefit of this PEP, making packaging Python packages for distros easier
and more reliable. In addition, the authors envision other types of tools
making use of this information, e.g., dependency analysis tools like Repology_,
Dependabot_ and libraries.io_.

Software bill of materials (SBOM) generation tools may also be able to use this
information, e.g. for flagging that external dependencies listed in
``pyproject.toml`` but not contained in wheel metadata are likely vendored
within the wheel. :pep:`770` ("Improving measurability of Python packages with
Software Bill-of-Materials"), which standardizes how SBOMs are included in
wheels, contains an instructive section on how that PEP differs from this one.

Packages with external dependencies are typically hard to build from source,
and error messages from build failures tend to be hard to decipher for end
users. Missing external dependencies on the end user's system are the most
likely cause of build failures. If installers can show the required external
dependencies as part of their error message, this may save users a lot of time.

At the moment, information on external dependencies is only captured in
installation documentation of individual packages. It is hard to maintain for
package authors and tends to go out of date. It's also hard for users and
distro packagers to find it. Having a canonical place to record this dependency
information will improve this situation.

This PEP is not trying to specify how the external dependencies should be used,
nor a mechanism to implement a name mapping from names of individual packages
that are canonical for Python projects published on PyPI to those of other
packaging ecosystems. Those topics should be addressed in separate PEPs.


Rationale
=========

Types of external dependencies
------------------------------

Multiple types of external dependencies can be distinguished:

- Concrete packages that can be identified by name and have a canonical
  location in another language-specific package repository. E.g., Rust
  packages on `crates.io <https://crates.io/>`__, R packages on
  `CRAN <https://cran.r-project.org/>`__, JavaScript packages on the
  `npm registry <https://www.npmjs.com/>`__.
- Concrete packages that can be identified by name but do not have a clear
  canonical location. This is typically the case for libraries and tools
  written in C, C++, Fortran, CUDA and other low-level languages. E.g.,
  Boost, OpenSSL, Protobuf, Intel MKL, GCC.
- "Virtual" packages, which are names for concepts, types of tools or
  interfaces. These typically have multiple implementations, which *are*
  concrete packages. E.g., a C++ compiler, BLAS, LAPACK, OpenMP, MPI.

Concrete packages are straightforward to understand, and are a concept present
in every package management system. Virtual packages are a concept
also present in a number of packaging systems -- but not always, and the
details of their implementation vary.

Cross compilation
-----------------

Cross compilation is not yet (as of May 2025) well-supported by stdlib
modules and ``pyproject.toml`` metadata. It is however important when
translating external dependencies to those of other packaging systems (with
tools like ``pyp2spec``). Introducing support for cross compilation immediately
in this PEP is much easier than extending ``[external]`` in the future, hence
the authors choose to include this now.

Terminology
'''''''''''

This PEP uses the following terminology:

- *build machine*: the machine on which the package build process is being
  executed.
- *host machine*: the machine on which the produced artifact will be installed
  and run.
- *build dependency*: package required only during the build process. It must
  be available at build time and is built for the *build* machine's OS and
  architecture. Typical examples include compilers, code generators, and
  build tools.
- *host dependency*: package needed during the build and often also at runtime.
  It must be available during the build and is built for the *host* machine's OS
  and architecture. These are usually libraries the project links against.
- *runtime dependency*: package required only when the package is used after
  installation. It is not required at build time but must be available on
  the *host* machine at runtime.

Note that this terminology is not consistent across build and packaging tools,
so care must be taken when comparing build/host dependencies in
``pyproject.toml`` to dependencies from other package managers.

Note that "target machine" or "target dependency" are not used in this PEP. That
is typically only relevant for cross-compiling a compiler or other such advanced
scenarios [#gcc-cross-terminology]_, [#meson-cross]_ -- this is out of scope for
this PEP.

Finally, note that while "dependency" is the term most widely used for packages
needed at build time, the existing key in ``pyproject.toml`` for PyPI
build-time dependencies is ``build-requires``. Hence this PEP uses the keys
``build-requires`` and ``host-requires`` under ``[external]`` for consistency.

Build and host dependencies
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Clear separation of metadata associated with the definition of build and host
platforms, rather than assuming that build and host platform will always be
the same, is important [#pypackaging-native-cross]_.

Build dependencies are typically run during the build process - they may be
compilers, code generators, or other such tools. In case the use of a build
dependency implies a runtime dependency, that runtime dependency does not have
to be declared explicitly. For example, when compiling Fortran code with
``gfortran`` into a Python extension module, the package likely incurs a
dependency on the ``libgfortran`` runtime library. The rationale for not
explicitly listing such runtime dependencies is two-fold: (1) it may depend on
compiler/linker flags or details of the build environment whether the
dependency is present, and (2) these runtime dependencies can be detected and
handled automatically by tools like ``auditwheel``.

Host dependencies are typically not run during the build process, but only used
for linking against. This is not a rule though -- it may be possible or
necessary to run a host dependency under an emulator, or through a custom tool
like crossenv_. When host dependencies imply a runtime dependency, that runtime
dependency also does not have to be declared, just like for build dependencies.

When host dependencies are declared and a tool is not cross-compilation aware
and has to do something with external dependencies, the tool MAY merge the
``host-requires`` list into ``build-requires``. This may for example happen if
an installer like ``pip`` starts reporting external dependencies as a likely
cause of a build failure when a package fails to build from an sdist.

Specifying external dependencies
--------------------------------

Concrete package specification
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

A `PURL`_ implements a scheme for identifying packages that is meant to be portable
across packaging ecosystems. Its design is::

    scheme:type/namespace/name@version?qualifiers#subpath

The ``scheme`` component is a fixed string, ``pkg``, and of the other
components only ``type`` and ``name`` are required.

Since external dependencies are likely to be typed by hand, we propose a PURL
derivative that, in the name of ergonomics and user-friendliness, introduces a
number of changes (further discussed below):

- Support for virtual packages via a new ``virtual`` type.
- Allow version ranges (and not just literals) in the ``version`` field.

In this derivative, we replace the ``pkg`` scheme with ``dep``. Hence,
we will refer to them as ``dep:`` URLs.

As an example, a ``dep:`` URL for the ``requests`` package on PyPI would be::

    dep:pypi/requests
    # equivalent to pkg:pypi/requests

Adopting PURL-compatible strings to specify external dependencies in ``pyproject.toml`` solves a
number of problems at once - and there are already implementations of the
specification in Python and multiple languages. PURL is also already supported
by dependency-related tooling like SPDX (see
`External Repository Identifiers in the SPDX 2.3 spec <https://spdx.github.io/spdx-spec/v2.3/external-repository-identifiers/#f35-purl>`__),
the `Open Source Vulnerability format <https://ossf.github.io/osv-schema/#affectedpackage-field>`__,
and the `Sonatype OSS Index <https://ossindex.sonatype.org/doc/coordinates>`__;
not having to wait years before support in such tooling arrives is valuable.

For concrete packages without a canonical package manager to refer to, either
``dep:generic/dep-name`` can be used, or a direct reference to the VCS system
that the package is maintained in (e.g.,
``dep:github/user-or-org-name/dep-name``). Which of these is more appropriate
is situation-dependent. This PEP recommends using ``dep:generic`` when the
package name is unambiguous and well-known (e.g., ``dep:generic/git`` or
``dep:generic/openblas``), and using the VCS as the type otherwise.

Virtual package specification
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

PURL does not offer support for virtual or virtual dependency specification yet.
A `proposal to add a virtual type <https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/pull/450>`__
is being discussed for revision 1.1.

In the meantime, we propose adding a new *type* to our ``dep:`` derivative, the ``virtual``
type, which can take two *namespaces*:

- ``interface``: for components such as BLAS or MPI.
- ``compiler``: for compiled languages like C or Rust.

The *name* should be the most common name for the interface or language, lowercased.
Some examples include::

  dep:virtual/compiler/c
  dep:virtual/compiler/cxx
  dep:virtual/compiler/rust
  dep:virtual/interface/blas
  dep:virtual/interface/lapack

Since there are a relatively limited number of such dependencies,
it seems like it will be understandable and map well to Linux
distros with virtual packages and to the likes of conda and Spack.

Versioning
''''''''''

PURLs support fixed versions via the ``@`` component of the URL. For example,
``numpy===2.0`` can be expressed as ``pkg:pypi/numpy@2.0``.

Support in PURL for version expressions and ranges beyond a fixed version is
available via ``vers`` URIs (`see specification <vers>`__)::

  vers:type/version-constraint|version-constraint|...

Users are supposed to couple a ``pkg:`` URL with a ``vers:`` URL. For example,
to express ``numpy>=2.0``, the PURL equivalent would be ``pkg:pypi/numpy`` plus
``vers:pypi/>=2.0``. This can be done with:

- A two-item list: ``["pkg:pypi/numpy", "vers:pypi/>=2.0"]``.
- A `percent-encoded <https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/blob/main/PURL-SPECIFICATION.rst#character-encoding>`__
  URL qualifier: ``pkg:pypi/numpy?vers=vers:pypi%2F%3E%3D2.0``.

Since none of these options are very ergonomic, the version field in ``dep:`` URLs accepts
version range specifiers too, with these rules:

- The ``vers:`` scheme is omitted.
- The *type* is omitted and assumed to match the PURL *type*. If there's no match,
  the type is assumed to be ``pypi``.
- When no operator is present, the field is understood as a version literal.
- Otherwise, it is considered a version range specifier.

Some examples:

- ``dep:pypi/numpy@2.0``: ``numpy`` pinned at exactly version 2.0.
- ``dep:pypi/numpy@>=2.0``: ``numpy`` with version greater or equal than 2.0.
- ``dep:virtual/interface/lapack@>=3.7.1``: any package implementing the
  LAPACK interface for version greater or equal than ``3.7.1``.

Dependency specifiers
'''''''''''''''''''''

Regular Python dependency specifiers (as originally defined in :pep:`508`) may
be used behind PURLs. PURL qualifiers, which use ``?`` followed by a package
type-specific dependency specifier component, must not be used. The reason for
this is pragmatic: dependency specifiers are already used for other metadata in
``pyproject.toml``, any tooling that is used with ``pyproject.toml`` is likely
to already have a robust implementation to parse it. And we do not expect to
need the extra possibilities that PURL qualifiers provide (e.g. to specify a
Conan or conda channel, or a RubyGems platform).

Canonical names of dependencies and ``-dev(el)`` split packages
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

It is fairly common for distros to split a package into two or more packages.
In particular, runtime components are often separately installable from
development components (headers, pkg-config and CMake files, etc.). The latter
then typically has a name with ``-dev`` or ``-devel`` appended to the
project/library name. This split is the responsibility of each distro to
maintain, and should not be reflected in the ``[external]`` table. It is not
possible to specify this in a reasonable way that works across distros, hence
only the canonical name should be used in ``[external]``.

The intended meaning of using a ``dep:`` string is "the full package
with the name specified". It will depend on the context in which the metadata
is used whether the split is relevant. For example, if ``libffi`` is a host
dependency and a tool wants to prepare an environment for building a wheel,
then if a distro has split off the headers for ``libffi`` into a
``libffi-devel`` package then the tool has to install both ``libffi`` and
``libffi-devel``.

Python development headers
''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Python headers and other build support files may also be split. This is the
same situation as in the section above (because Python is simply a regular
package in distros). *However*, a ``python-dev|devel`` dependency is special because
in ``pyproject.toml`` Python itself is an implicit rather than an explicit
dependency. Hence a choice needs to be made here - add ``python-dev`` implicitly,
or make each package author add it explicitly under ``[external]``. For
consistency between Python dependencies and external dependencies, we choose to
add it implicitly. Python development headers must be assumed to be necessary
when an ``[external]`` table contains one or more compiler packages.

New Core Metadata fields
------------------------

Two new Core Metadata fields are proposed:

- ``Requires-External-Dep``. An external requirement expressed as a ``dep:``
  URL. Mimics the transition from ``Requires`` to ``Requires-Dist``. We
  chose the ``-Dep`` suffix to emphasize that the value is not a regular
  Python specifier (distribution), but a ``dep:`` URL.
- ``Provides-External-Extra``. An *extra* group that carries external dependencies
  (as found in ``Requires-External-Dep``) only.

Since the Core Metadata specification does not contain fields for any metadata in
``pyproject.toml``'s ``[build-system]`` table, the ``build-requires``
and ``host-requires`` content do not need to be reflected in existing core
metadata fields.

Additionally, this PEP also proposes to deprecate the ``Requires-External`` field.
The reasons being:

- Avoiding confusion with the newly proposed fields.
- Avoiding potential incompatibilities with existing usage (even if limited).
- Low penetration in the ecosystem:

  - There is no direct correspondence to a field in the ``pyproject.toml`` metadata.
  - Mainstream build backends like ``setuptools`` (see `pypa/setuptools#4220`_),
    ``hatch`` (see `pypa/hatch#1712`_), ``flit`` (see `pypa/flit#353`_), or ``poetry``
    do not offer ways to specify it or require a plugin (e.g. `poetry-external-dependencies`_).
    ``maturin`` does seem to support it since 0.7.0 (see `PyO3/maturin@5b0e4808`_),
    but it's not directly documented. Other backends like ``scikit-build-core`` or
    ``meson-python`` returned no results for ``External-Requires``.
  - The field is not included in the `PyPI JSON API responses`_.

Note about the differences between sdist and wheel metadata
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

A wheel may vendor its external dependencies. This happens in particular when
distributing wheels on PyPI or other Python package indexes -- and tools like
auditwheel_, delvewheel_ and delocate_ automate this process. As a result, a
``Requires-External`` entry in an sdist may disappear from a wheel built from
that sdist. It is also possible that a ``Requires-External`` entry remains in a
wheel, either unchanged or with narrower constraints. ``auditwheel`` does not
vendor certain allow-listed dependencies, such as OpenGL, by default. In
addition, ``auditwheel`` and ``delvewheel`` allow a user to manually exclude
dependencies via a ``--exclude`` or ``--no-dll`` command-line flag. This is
used to avoid vendoring large shared libraries, for example those from CUDA.

``Requires-External`` entries generated from external dependencies in
``pyproject.toml`` MAY differ between an sdist and its corresponding wheel(s).
However, the ``Requires-External`` entries in the wheels MUST always specify
a narrower set of dependencies.

Note that this does not imply that the field must be marked as Dynamic, since this
distinction only applies to wheels built from an sdist by a build backend. In
particular, wheels built from other wheels do not need to satisfy this constraint (see
`message 179 in this DPO thread
<https://discuss.python.org/t/split-from-pep-639-expressing-project-vs-distribution-licenses-post-pep-639-mod-titled/90314/179>`__
.)

Dependency groups
-----------------

This PEP has chosen to include the :pep:`735` key ``dependency-groups`` under
the ``[external]`` table too. This decision is motivated by the need of having
similar functionality for external metadata. The top-level table cannot be used
for external dependencies because it's expected to have PEP 508 strings (and tables
for group includes), while we have chosen to rely on ``dep:`` URLs for the external
dependencies. Conflating both would raise significant backwards compatibility
issues with existing usage.

Strictly speaking, the ``dependency-groups`` schema allows us to define external
dependencies in per-group sub-tables::

  [dependency-groups]
  dev = [
    "pytest",
    { external = ["dep:cargo/ripgrep"] },
  ]

However, this has the same problem: we are mixing different types of dependency
specifiers in the same data structure. We believe it's cleaner to separate concerns
in different top-level tables, hence why we still prefer to have
``external.dependency-groups``.

Optional dependencies versus dependency groups
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The rationale for having ``external.dependency-groups`` is identical for the
rationale given in :pep:`735` for introducing ``[dependency-groups]``. The
intended usage and semantics of inclusion/exclusion into Core Metadata
is thus identical to ``[dependency-groups]``.

``external.optional-dependencies`` will show up in Core Metadata.
``external.dependency-groups`` will not.

Specification
=============

If metadata is improperly specified then tools MUST raise an error to notify
the user about their mistake.

Changes in Core Metadata
------------------------

Deprecations
''''''''''''

The ``External-Requires`` Core Metadata field will be marked as *obsolete* and its
usage will be discouraged.

Additions
'''''''''

Two new fields are added to Core Metadata:

- ``Requires-External-Dep``. An external requirement expressed as a ``dep:`` URL.
- ``Provides-External-Extra``. An *extra* group that carries external dependencies
  (as found in ``Requires-External-Dep``) only.

Version bump
''''''''''''

Given that the proposed changes are purely additive, the Core Metadata
version will be bumped to 2.5.

This will only impact PyPI and tools that want to support external runtime dependencies,
and require no changes otherwise.


Changes in ``pyproject.toml``
-----------------------------

Note that ``pyproject.toml`` content is in the same format as in :pep:`621`.

Table name
''''''''''

Tools MUST specify fields defined by this PEP in a table named ``[external]``.
No tools may add fields to this table which are not defined by this PEP or
subsequent PEPs. The lack of an ``[external]`` table means the package either
does not have any external dependencies, or the ones it does have are assumed
to be present on the system already.

``build-requires``/``optional-build-requires``
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

- Format: Array of ``dep:`` strings (``build-requires``) and a table
  with values of arrays of ``dep:`` strings (``optional-build-requires``)
- `Core metadata`_: N/A

The (optional) external build requirements needed to build the project.

For ``build-requires``, it is a key whose value is an array of strings. Each
string represents a build requirement of the project and MUST be formatted as
a valid ``dep:`` string.

For ``optional-build-requires``, it is a table where each key specifies an
extra set of build requirements and whose value is an array of strings. The
strings of the arrays MUST be valid ``dep:`` strings.

``host-requires``/``optional-host-requires``
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

- Format: Array of ``dep:`` strings (``host-requires``) and a table
  with values of arrays of ``dep:`` strings (``optional-host-requires``)
- `Core metadata`_: N/A

The (optional) external host requirements needed to build the project.

For ``host-requires``, it is a key whose value is an array of strings. Each
string represents a host requirement of the project and MUST be formatted as
a valid ``dep:`` string.

For ``optional-host-requires``, it is a table where each key specifies an
extra set of host requirements and whose value is an array of strings. The
strings of the arrays MUST be valid ``dep:`` strings.

``dependencies``/``optional-dependencies``
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

- Format: Array of ``dep:`` strings (``dependencies``) and a table
  with values of arrays of ``dep:`` strings (``optional-dependencies``)
- `Core metadata`_: ``Requires-External-Dep``, ``Provides-External-Extra``

The (optional) runtime dependencies of the project.

For ``dependencies``, it is a key whose value is an array of strings. Each
string represents a dependency of the project and MUST be formatted as either a
valid ``dep:`` string. Each string must be added to `Core Metadata`_ as a
``Requires-External-Dep`` field.

For ``optional-dependencies``, it is a table where each key specifies an *extra*
and whose value is an array of strings. The strings of the arrays MUST be valid
``dep:`` strings. For each ``optional-dependencies`` group:

- The name of the group MUST be added to `Core Metadata`_ as a
  ``Provides-External-Extra`` field.
- The ``dep:`` URLs in that group MUST be added to `Core Metadata`_ as a
  ``Requires-External-Dep`` field, with the corresponding ``; extra == 'name'``
  environment marker.

``dependency-groups``
'''''''''''''''''''''

- Format: A table where each key is the name of the group, and the values are
  arrays of ``dep:`` strings, tables, or a mix of both.
- `Core metadata`_: N/A

PEP 735 -style dependency groups, but using ``dep:`` URLs instead of PEP 508 strings as
dependency specifiers. Every other detail (e.g. group inclusion, name normalization)
follows the official `Dependency Groups specification
<https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/dependency-groups/>`__.

Examples
--------

These examples show what the ``[external]`` content for a number of packages is
expected to be.

cryptography 39.0
'''''''''''''''''

``pyproject.toml`` content:

.. code:: toml

    [external]
    build-requires = [
      "dep:virtual/compiler/c",
      "dep:virtual/compiler/rust",
      "dep:generic/pkg-config",
    ]
    host-requires = [
      "dep:generic/openssl",
      "dep:generic/libffi",
    ]

SciPy 1.10
''''''''''

``pyproject.toml`` content:

.. code:: toml

    [external]
    build-requires = [
      "dep:virtual/compiler/c",
      "dep:virtual/compiler/cpp",
      "dep:virtual/compiler/fortran",
      "dep:generic/ninja",
      "dep:generic/pkg-config",
    ]
    host-requires = [
      "dep:virtual/interface/blas",
      "dep:virtual/interface/lapack@>=3.7.1",
    ]

Pillow 10.1.0
'''''''''''''

``pyproject.toml`` content:

.. code:: toml

    [external]
    build-requires = [
      "dep:virtual/compiler/c",
    ]
    host-requires = [
      "dep:generic/libjpeg",
      "dep:generic/zlib",
    ]

    [external.optional-host-requires]
    extra = [
      "dep:generic/lcms2",
      "dep:generic/freetype",
      "dep:generic/libimagequant",
      "dep:generic/libraqm",
      "dep:generic/libtiff",
      "dep:generic/libxcb",
      "dep:generic/libwebp",
      "dep:generic/openjpeg@>=2.0",
      "dep:generic/tk",
    ]


NAVis 1.4.0
'''''''''''

``pyproject.toml`` content:

.. code:: toml

    [project.optional-dependencies]
    r = ["rpy2"]

    [external]
    build-requires = [
      "dep:generic/XCB; platform_system=='Linux'",
    ]

    [external.optional-dependencies]
    nat = [
      "dep:cran/nat",
      "dep:cran/nat.nblast",
    ]

``PKG-INFO`` / ``METADATA`` content:

.. code::

  Provides-External-Extra: nat
  Requires-External-Dep: dep:cran/nat; extra == 'nat'
  Requires-External-Dep: dep:cran/nat.nblast; extra == 'nat'

Spyder 6.0
''''''''''

``pyproject.toml`` content:

.. code:: toml

    [external]
    dependencies = [
      "dep:cargo/ripgrep",
      "dep:cargo/tree-sitter-cli",
      "dep:golang/github.com/junegunn/fzf",
    ]

``PKG-INFO`` / ``METADATA`` content:

.. code::

  Requires-External-Dep: dep:cargo/ripgrep
  Requires-External-Dep: dep:cargo/tree-sitter-cli
  Requires-External-Dep: dep:golang/github.com/junegunn/fzf

jupyterlab-git 0.41.0
'''''''''''''''''''''

``pyproject.toml`` content:

.. code:: toml

    [external]
    dependencies = [
      "dep:generic/git",
    ]

    [external.optional-build-requires]
    dev = [
      "dep:generic/nodejs",
    ]

``PKG-INFO`` / ``METADATA`` content:

.. code::

  Requires-External-Dep: dep:generic/git

PyEnchant 3.2.2
'''''''''''''''

``pyproject.toml`` content:

.. code:: toml

    [external]
    dependencies = [
      # libenchant is needed on all platforms but only vendored into wheels on
      # Windows, so on Windows the build backend should remove this external
      # dependency from wheel metadata.
      "dep:github/AbiWord/enchant",
    ]

With dependency groups
''''''''''''''''''''''

``pyproject.toml`` content:

.. code:: toml

    [external.dependency-groups]
    dev = [
      "dep:generic/catch2",
      "dep:generic/valgrind",
    ]


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

There is no major impact on backwards compatibility, as this PEP primarily adds new,
optional metadata. In the absence of such metadata, nothing changes for package
authors or packaging tooling.

The only change introduced in this PEP that has impact on existing projects is the
deprecation of the ``External-Requires`` Core Metadata field. We estimate the impact
of this deprecation to be negligible, given the its low penetration in the ecosystem
(see Rationale).

The field will still be recognized by existing tools such as `setuptools-ext`_
but its usage will be discouraged in the `Python Packaging User Guide`_, similar to
what it's done for obsolete fields like ``Requires`` (deprecated in favor of
``Requires-Dist``).

Security Implications
=====================

There are no direct security concerns as this PEP covers how to statically
define metadata for external dependencies. Any security issues would stem from
how tools consume the metadata and choose to act upon it.


How to Teach This
=================

External dependencies and if and how those external dependencies are vendored
are topics that are typically not understood in detail by Python package
authors. We intend to start from how an external dependency is defined, the
different ways it can be depended on---from runtime-only with ``ctypes`` or a
``subprocess`` call to it being a build dependency that's linked against---
before going into how to declare external dependencies in metadata. The
documentation should make explicit what is relevant for package authors, and
what for distro packagers.

Material on this topic will be added to the most relevant packaging tutorials,
primarily the `Python Packaging User Guide`_. In addition, we expect that any
build backend that adds support for external dependencies metadata will include
information about that in its documentation, as will tools like ``auditwheel``.


Reference Implementation
========================

This PEP contains a metadata specification, rather that a code feature - hence
there will not be code implementing the metadata spec as a whole. However,
there are parts that do have a reference implementation:

1. The ``[external]`` table has to be valid TOML and therefore can be loaded
   with ``tomllib``. This table can be further processed with the
   `pyproject-external`_ package, demonstrated below.
2. The PURL specification, as a key part of this spec, has a Python package
   with a reference implementation for constructing and parsing PURLs:
   `packageurl-python`_. This package is wrapped in `pyproject-external`_
   to provide ``dep:``-specific validation and handling.

There are multiple possible consumers and use cases of this metadata, once
that metadata gets added to Python packages. Tested metadata for all of the
top 150 most-downloaded packages from PyPI with published platform-specific
wheels can be found in `rgommers/external-deps-build`_. This metadata has
been validated by using it to build wheels from sdists patched with that
metadata in clean Docker containers.

Example
-------

Given a ``pyproject.toml`` with this ``[external]`` table:

.. code-block:: toml

  [external]
  build-requires = [
    "dep:virtual/compiler/c",
    "dep:virtual/compiler/rust",
    "dep:generic/pkg-config",
  ]
  host-requires = [
    "dep:generic/openssl",
    "dep:generic/libffi",
  ]

You can use ``pyproject_external.External`` to parse it and manipulate it:

.. code-block:: python

  >>> from pyproject_external import External
  >>> external = External.from_pyproject_path("./pyproject.toml")
  >>> external.validate()
  >>> external.to_dict()
  {'external': {'build_requires': ['dep:virtual/compiler/c', 'dep:virtual/compiler/rust', 'dep:generic/pkg-config'], 'host_requires': ['dep:generic/openssl', 'dep:generic/libffi']}}
  >>> external.build_requires
  [DepURL(type='virtual', namespace='compiler', name='c', version=None, qualifiers={}, subpath=None), DepURL(type='virtual', namespace='compiler', name='rust', version=None, qualifiers={}, subpath=None), DepURL(type='generic', namespace=None, name='pkg-config', version=None, qualifiers={}, subpath=None)]
  >>> external.build_requires[0]
  DepURL(type='virtual', namespace='compiler', name='c', version=None, qualifiers={}, subpath=None)

Note the proposed ``[external]`` table was well-formed. With invalid contents such as:

.. code-block:: toml

  [external]
  build-requires = [
    "dep:this-is-missing-the-type",
    "pkg:not-a-dep-url"
  ]

You would fail the validation:

.. code-block:: python

  >>> external = External.from_pyproject_data(
    {
      "external": {
        "build_requires": [
          "dep:this-is-missing-the-type",
          "pkg:not-a-dep-url"
        ]
      }
    }
  )
  ValueError: purl is missing the required type component: 'dep:this-is-missing-the-type'.


Rejected Ideas
==============

Specific syntax for external dependencies which are also packaged on PyPI
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are non-Python packages which are packaged on PyPI, such as Ninja,
patchelf and CMake. What is typically desired is to use the system version of
those, and if it's not present on the system then install the PyPI package for
it. The authors believe that specific support for this scenario is not
necessary (or too complex to justify such support); a dependency provider for
external dependencies can treat PyPI as one possible source for obtaining the
package. An example mapping for this use case is proposed in *name mapping PEP*.

Using library and header names as external dependencies
-------------------------------------------------------

A previous draft PEP (`"External dependencies" (2015) <https://github.com/pypa/interoperability-peps/pull/30>`__)
proposed using specific library and header names as external dependencies. This
is both too granular, and insufficient (e.g., headers are often unversioned; multiple
packages may provide the same header or library). Using
package names is a well-established pattern across packaging ecosystems
and should be preferred.

Splitting host dependencies with explicit ``-dev`` or ``-devel`` suffixes
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

This convention is not consistent across all ecosystems. Since the need
for explicit control is quite niche and we don't want to add design
complexity without enough clear use cases, we have chosen to rely solely
on the the ``build``, ``host`` and ``run`` category split, with tools
being in charge of which category applies to each case in a context-dependent way.

If this proves to be insufficient, a future PEP could use the URL qualifier features
present in the PURL schema (``?key=value``) to implement the necessary adjustments.

Identifier indirections
-----------------------

Some ecosystems exhibit methods to select packages based on parametrized functions
like ``cmake("dependency")`` or ``compiler("language")``, which return package
names based on some additional context or configuration. This feature is arguably
not very common and, even when present, rarely used. Additionally, its dynamic
nature makes it prone to changing meaning over time, and relying on specific build
systems for the name resolution is in general not a good idea.

The authors prefer static identifiers that can be mapped explicitly via well known metadata
(e.g. as proposed in *name mapping PEP*).

Ecosystems that do implement these indirections can use them to support the infrastructure
designed to generate the mappings proposed in *name mapping PEP*.

Adding a ``host-requires`` key under ``[build-system]``
-------------------------------------------------------

Adding ``host-requires`` for host dependencies that are on PyPI in order to
better support name mapping to other packaging systems with support for
cross-compiling seems useful in principle, for the same reasons as this PEP
adds a ``host-requires`` under the ``[external]`` table. However, it isn't
necessary to include in this PEP, and hence the authors prefer to keep the
scope of this PEP limited - a future PEP on cross compilation may want to
tackle this. `This issue <https://github.com/rgommers/peps/issues/6>`__
contains more arguments in favor and against adding ``host-requires`` under
``[build-system]`` as part of this PEP.

Reusing the ``Requires-External`` field in Core Metadata
--------------------------------------------------------

The `Core Metadata`_ specification contains one relevant field, namely
``Requires-External``. While at first sight it would be a good candidate
to record the ``external.dependencies`` table, the authors have decided
to not re-use this field to propagate the external runtime dependencies metadata.

The ``Requires-External`` field has very loosely defined semantics as of
version 2.4. Essentially: ``name [(version)][; environment marker]``
(with square brackets denoting optional fields). It is not defined what valid strings for ``name`` are;
the example in the specification uses both "C" as a language name, and "libpng" as a package name.
Tightening up the semantics would be backwards incompatible, and leaving it as is seems
unsatisfactory. The ``dep:`` URLs would need
to be decomposed to fit in this syntax.


Open Issues
===========

Versioning of virtual dependencies
-----------------------------------

While virtual dependencies can be versioned with the same syntax, it must be better
specified however what the version scheme is, because this is not as clear for
virtual types as it is for PURL types (e.g., there can be multiple implementations,
and virtual interfaces may not be unambiguously versioned). E.g.:

- OpenMP: has regular ``MAJOR.MINOR`` versions of its standard, so would look
  like ``>=4.5``.
- BLAS/LAPACK: should use the versioning used by `Reference LAPACK`_, which
  defines what the standard APIs are. Uses ``MAJOR.MINOR.MICRO``, so would look
  like ``>=3.10.0``.
- Compilers: these implement language standards. For C, C++ and Fortran these
  are versioned by year. In order for versions to sort correctly, we choose to
  use the full year (four digits). So "at least C99" would be ``>=1999``, and
  selecting C++14 or Fortran 77 would be ``==2014`` or ``==1977`` respectively.
  Other languages may use different versioning schemes. These should be
  described somewhere before they are used in ``pyproject.toml``.

A logistical challenge is where to describe the versioning - given that this
will evolve over time, this PEP itself is not the right location for it.
Instead, this PEP should point at that (to be created) location.

Who defines canonical names and canonical package structure?
------------------------------------------------------------

Similarly to the logistics around versioning is the question about what names
are allowed and where they are described. And then who is in control of that
description and responsible for maintaining it. Our tentative answer is: there
should be a central list for ``dep:generic`` and ``dep:virtual`` URLs,
maintained as a PyPA project. See
https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-725-specifying-external-dependencies-in-pyproject-toml/31888/62.
TODO: once that list/project is prototyped, include it in the PEP and close
this open issue.


References
==========

.. [#singular-vision-native-deps] The "define native requirements metadata"
   part of the "Wanting a singular packaging vision" thread (2022, Discourse):
   https://discuss.python.org/t/wanting-a-singular-packaging-tool-vision/21141/92

.. [#pypacking-native-deps] pypackaging-native: "Native dependencies"
   https://pypackaging-native.github.io/key-issues/native-dependencies/

.. [#gcc-cross-terminology] GCC documentation - Configure Terms and History,
   https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gccint/Configure-Terms.html

.. [#meson-cross] Meson documentation - Cross compilation
   https://mesonbuild.com/Cross-compilation.html

.. [#pypackaging-native-cross] pypackaging-native: "Cross compilation"
   https://pypackaging-native.github.io/key-issues/cross_compilation/

.. [#pkgconfig-and-ctypes-findlibrary] The "``pkgconfig`` specification as an
   alternative to ``ctypes.util.find_library``" thread (2023, Discourse):
   https://discuss.python.org/t/pkgconfig-specification-as-an-alternative-to-ctypes-util-find-library/31379


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.


.. _PyPI: https://pypi.org
.. _Core Metadata: https://packaging.python.org/specifications/core-metadata/
.. _setuptools: https://setuptools.readthedocs.io/
.. _setuptools metadata: https://setuptools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/setuptools.html#metadata
.. _SPDX: https://spdx.dev/
.. _PURL: https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/
.. _packageurl-python: https://pypi.org/project/packageurl-python/
.. _vers: https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/blob/version-range-spec/VERSION-RANGE-SPEC.rst
.. _vers implementation for PURL: https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/pull/139
.. _pyp2spec: https://github.com/befeleme/pyp2spec
.. _Grayskull: https://github.com/conda/grayskull
.. _dh_python: https://www.debian.org/doc/packaging-manuals/python-policy/index.html#dh-python
.. _Repology: https://repology.org/
.. _Dependabot: https://github.com/dependabot
.. _libraries.io: https://libraries.io/
.. _crossenv: https://github.com/benfogle/crossenv
.. _Python Packaging User Guide: https://packaging.python.org
.. _auditwheel: https://github.com/pypa/auditwheel
.. _delocate: https://github.com/matthew-brett/delocate
.. _delvewheel: https://github.com/adang1345/delvewheel
.. _verspurl: https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/issues/386
.. _rgommers/external-deps-build: https://github.com/rgommers/external-deps-build
.. _pyproject-external: https://github.com/jaimergp/pyproject-external
.. _Reference LAPACK: https://github.com/Reference-LAPACK/lapack
.. _setuptools-ext: https://pypi.org/project/setuptools-ext/
.. _PyPI JSON API responses: https://docs.pypi.org/api/json/
.. _pypa/hatch#1712: https://github.com/pypa/hatch/issues/1712
.. _pypa/flit#353: https://github.com/pypa/flit/issues/353
.. _pypa/setuptools#4220: https://github.com/pypa/setuptools/discussions/4220#discussioncomment-8930671
.. _poetry-external-dependencies: https://pypi.org/project/poetry-external-dependencies/
.. _PyO3/maturin@5b0e4808: https://github.com/PyO3/maturin/commit/5b0e4808bb8852fe796cd2848932a35fbb14de8b
.. _elfdeps: https://github.com/python-wheel-build/elfdeps/
