PEP: 834
Title: Maker syntax
Author: Jelle Zijlstra <jelle.zijlstra@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: Pending
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Created: 16-May-2026
Python-Version: 3.16
Post-History: Pending


Abstract
========

This PEP proposes a new syntax for declaring class-like constructs::

    make maker C:
        ...

When this syntax is used, the name ``maker`` is looked up in the
current scope and its ``__make__`` attribute is used to build an arbitrary object.

Intended use cases include enums, dataclasses, and several typing constructs::

    from dataclasses import dataclass
    from enum import enum
    from typing import namedtuple, protocol, typeddict

    make dataclass InventoryItem(slots=True):
        name: str
        amount: int

    make enum Color:
        red = 1
        green = 2
        blue = 3

    make typeddict Movie(closed=True):
        name: str
        year: int

    make protocol HasClose:
        def supports_close(self) -> None: ...

    make namedtuple Employee:
        name: str
        title: str

This provides more intuitive syntax for beginners and
improved flexibility in the implementation.


Motivation
==========

The Python standard library contains several constructs that create what may be called
a "class with benefits": something that is created through a class statement, but that
has some special behavior that is unlike a normal class. The :py:func:`dataclasses.dataclass`
decorator injects various methods into the class; the :py:class:`enum.Enum` base class
transforms a class into an enum; and the :py:mod:`typing` module provides mechanisms to
build protocols, named tuples, and typed dictionaries.

The current syntax is verbose and not intuitive for beginners. It requires users to
understand that certain base classes or decorators radically change what a class statement
does, instead of putting the special behavior of these constructs front and center in the
syntax.

This PEP proposes a flexible new syntax to declare these constructs using *makers*::

    make maker Simple:
        ...

    make maker Complex[T](Base, key="value"):
        ...

In this syntax, the name ``maker`` is looked up in the current scope and its ``__make__``
attribute is called with the name, bases, body, and constructor keyword arguments used in the definition.
This function may return an arbitrary object, which is then stored at the name provided in the definition.
The standard library will be changed to provide makers for dataclasses, enums, :py:class:`typing.Protocol`,
:py:class:`typing.NamedTuple`, and :py:class:`typing.TypedDict`.

In addition to improved concision, the new syntax allows more flexibility. The ``slots=True`` version
of dataclasses is currently implemented by creating a new wrapper class replacing the original class.
This can cause subtle differences between the class initially created by the class statement and the
class eventually bound to the class name. The dataclass maker can bypass this problem by
injecting the slots definition directly into the class body.


Specification
=============

Syntax
------

The grammar for class definitions is extended to allow a name before the
class name:

.. code-block:: peg

    class_def_raw:
        | 'class' NAME type_params? ['(' arguments? ')'] ':' block
        | 'make' NAME NAME type_params? ['(' arguments? ')'] ':' block

The first ``NAME`` in the second alternative is the *maker*.  The
second ``NAME`` is the name bound by the statement.  The type parameter list,
parenthesized arguments, and block have the same syntax as in an ordinary
class definition.

For example, all of the following are syntactically valid maker
definitions::

    make maker C:
        ...

    make maker C[T](Base[T], key=value):
        ...

    make type C:
        ...

The initial ``make`` token is a soft keyword in this position.  The maker
name itself is parsed as a normal name token after ``make``.  Existing and
future soft keywords may therefore be used as maker names in this position;
hard keywords may not be used as maker names.

Decorator syntax is supported in the same way as for ordinary class
definitions::

    @decorator
    make maker C:
        ...

The maker itself must be a bare name.  Attribute references and arbitrary
expressions are not supported; for example,
``make dataclasses.dataclass C:`` is a syntax error.


Runtime semantics
-----------------

A maker definition evaluates the maker name in the surrounding
scope, retrieves its ``__make__`` attribute, and calls that attribute
using a calling convention modeled on :py:func:`!builtins.__build_class__`.

The statement::

    make maker C(Base, key=value):
        body

is approximately equivalent to::

    _make = maker.__make__

    def C():
        __module__ = __name__
        __qualname__ = "C"
        body

    C = _make(C, "C", Base, key=value)

This pseudocode is explanatory only.  As with ordinary class definitions, the
body is compiled as a class body, not as an ordinary Python function body, and
the exact handling of ``__module__``, ``__qualname__``, ``__classcell__``,
annotations, static attributes, and related implementation details follows the
existing class-definition machinery.

The maker's ``__make__`` attribute is called with these arguments:

* the class body function;
* the name being bound, as a string;
* all positional arguments supplied in parentheses after the name;
* all keyword arguments supplied in parentheses after the name.

The return value of this call is the value bound to the class name, after
applying any decorators.  The returned object need not be a class.

For example, this maker delegates directly to the normal class creation
machinery::

    import builtins

    class Klass:
        def __make__(self, func, name, *bases, **kwds):
            return builtins.__build_class__(func, name, *bases, **kwds)

    klass = Klass()

    make klass C:
        x = 1

After executing this code, ``C`` is an ordinary class.

If the maker object has no ``__make__`` attribute, the statement
raises :py:exc:`AttributeError` at runtime.  Exceptions raised while evaluating
the maker name, retrieving ``__make__``, evaluating bases or keyword
arguments, executing the body, or applying decorators propagate normally.


Order of evaluation
-------------------

Maker definitions follow the same broad evaluation order as ordinary
class definitions, with the maker lookup replacing the lookup of
:py:func:`!builtins.__build_class__`.

For a maker definition, the order is:

1. Evaluate decorators, if any, from top to bottom.
2. Evaluate the maker name and retrieve its ``__make__`` attribute.
3. If the definition has type parameters, enter the synthetic type-parameter
   scope and create the type parameter objects.
4. Create the class body function.
5. Evaluate the bases and keyword arguments from left to right.  For a
   generic maker definition, these expressions are evaluated in the
   type-parameter scope, so they may refer to the type parameters.
6. Call the maker's ``__make__`` attribute.
7. Apply decorators, from bottom to top.
8. Bind the resulting object to the class name in the current scope.

As with ordinary class definitions, the exact interleaving of creating the
class body function and evaluating base expressions is an implementation
detail, except where it is observable through the ordering above.

The maker lookup in step 2 is deliberately outside the type-parameter
scope.  Type parameters are therefore not visible to the maker name lookup,
but they are visible to base expressions and to the class body.


Generic maker definitions
---------------------------------

Maker definitions may use the type parameter syntax introduced by
:pep:`695`::

    make maker C[T](Base[T]):
        item: T

The type parameters are created using the same runtime machinery as for
ordinary generic classes.  The class body receives ``__type_params__`` in its
namespace, as it does for an ordinary generic class.

The maker expression is evaluated before entering the synthetic
type-parameter scope.  This means that type parameters are not visible to the
maker lookup, even though they are visible to base expressions and to the
class body.

This rule prevents a type parameter from shadowing the maker.  For example::

    make dataclass C[dataclass]:
        value: dataclass

In this example, the maker is the ``dataclass`` object from the surrounding
scope.  The type parameter also named ``dataclass`` is visible in the class
body and may be used as an annotation, but it does not affect which maker is
called.

This is consistent with the role of the maker name: it selects the mechanism
used to construct the definition.  Type parameters parameterize the definition
being constructed; they do not participate in selecting the maker.

For explanatory purposes, the runtime behavior is similar to::

    _build = maker.__make__

    def _generic_parameters_of_C(_build):
        T = TypeVar("T")
        _type_params = (T,)

        def C():
            __type_params__ = _type_params
            item: T

        return _build(C, "C", Generic[T])

    C = _generic_parameters_of_C(_build)

Again, this pseudocode is not an exact source transformation.  In particular,
the actual implementation does not expose the temporary names shown here,
and the scoping rules are slightly different, as specified in :pep:`695`.

If the maker returns a class-like object by delegating to
:py:func:`!builtins.__build_class__`, ``__type_params__`` will normally become
an attribute on the resulting class because it was present in the class
namespace.  If the maker returns some other object, Python does not add
``__type_params__`` to that object after the maker returns.  A maker that
returns a non-class object is responsible for preserving any information from
the body that it wants to expose.


Interaction with metaclasses
----------------------------

Maker definitions do not directly invoke the normal metaclass
selection algorithm.  The ``metaclass`` keyword argument in the definition
is not special; it is passed to the maker as an ordinary keyword argument.
A maker that delegates to :py:func:`!builtins.__build_class__` receives the
same metaclass behavior as an ordinary class definition with the same bases
and keywords.

For example::

    class Maker:
        def __make__(self, func, name, *bases, **kwds):
            return builtins.__build_class__(func, name, *bases, **kwds)

    make maker C(Base, metaclass=Meta):
        ...

In this case ``Meta`` is handled by :py:func:`!builtins.__build_class__` in the
usual way.  A maker may instead interpret ``metaclass`` or other keywords
itself, pass them through, reject them, or ignore them.


Decorators
----------

Decorators on maker definitions behave like decorators on ordinary
class definitions.  They are evaluated before the maker call and applied to
the object returned by the maker.

The statement::

    @decorator1
    @decorator2
    make maker C:
        ...

is approximately equivalent to::

    C = decorator1(decorator2(maker.__make__(...)))

The decorators operate on the maker's return value.  If the maker returns
a non-class object, the decorators receive that non-class object.


AST
---

The :py:class:`ast.ClassDef` node gains a new field, ``maker``.  The field
is either ``None`` for ordinary class definitions or an :py:class:`ast.Name`
node in load context for maker definitions.

For example, parsing::

    make dataclass C:
        pass

produces an ``ast.ClassDef`` node with ``name == "C"`` and
``maker == ast.Name(id="dataclass", ctx=ast.Load())``.

The order of fields on :py:class:`ast.ClassDef` becomes::

    name
    bases
    keywords
    body
    decorator_list
    type_params
    maker

The :py:func:`compile` function rejects an AST whose ``maker`` field is
neither ``None`` nor an expression valid in load context.


Standard library changes
------------------------

The following makers will be added to the standard library:

* ``enum.enum``: creates an enum class.
* ``dataclasses.dataclass``: creates a dataclass.
* ``typing.protocol``: creates a protocol.
* ``typing.namedtuple``: creates a typed named tuple.
* ``typing.typeddict``: creates a typed dictionary.

The :py:mod:`types` module gains a helper function
``exec_class_body(func, ns)``.  The first argument is a class body function
such as the one passed to a maker's ``__make__`` method.  The second
argument is the namespace mapping into which the body should be executed.

The helper executes the body using the function's globals and closure, and
uses ``ns`` as the class namespace.  It performs the part of
:py:func:`!builtins.__build_class__` that runs the body, but does not select a
metaclass or create the final class object.  It returns ``None``; information
produced by executing the body is communicated by mutating ``ns``.


Type checker behavior
---------------------

The flexibility of makers means that it is difficult to check them in full generality.

Python type checkers should recognize the standard library makers and treat them similarly to the
existing syntax. In other cases, type checkers should look up the ``__make__`` attribute on
the maker and type check the call.

A ``__make__`` callable may be decorated with the :py:func:`typing.dataclass_transform` decorator,
indicating that the maker behaves similarly to a dataclass.


Examples
========

A maker that behaves exactly like an ordinary class statement can
delegate to :py:func:`!builtins.__build_class__`::

    import builtins

    class PlainMaker:
        def __make__(self, func, name, *bases, **kwds):
            print("Creating class", name)
            return builtins.__build_class__(func, name, *bases, **kwds)

    plain = PlainMaker()

    make plain C:  # prints "Creating class C"
        x = 1

Makers that need to inspect the namespace should use
``types.exec_class_body`` together with :py:func:`types.new_class`::

    import types

    class RecordingMaker:
        def __make__(self, func, name, *bases, **kwds):
            captured = {}

            def exec_body(ns):
                types.exec_class_body(func, ns)
                captured.update(ns)

            cls = types.new_class(name, bases, kwds, exec_body)
            cls.captured_namespace = captured
            return cls

    recording = RecordingMaker()

    make recording C:
        x = 1

    print(C.captured_namespace)  # {"__module__": "__main__", "__qualname__": "C", ...}

Makers that return non-class objects may execute the body into an ordinary
mapping and construct any object they choose from the resulting namespace::

    import types

    class NamespaceMaker:
        def __make__(self, func, name):
            ns = {}
            types.exec_class_body(func, ns)
            return types.SimpleNamespace(**{
                # Exclude dunders injected by the class body
                k: v for k, v in ns.items() if not (k.startswith("__") and k.endswith("__"))
            })

    namespace = NamespaceMaker()

    make namespace Constants:
        AIRSPEED_AFRICAN = 5
        AIRSPEED_EUROPEAN = 8

    print(Constants)  # namespace(AIRSPEED_AFRICAN=5, AIRSPEED_EUROPEAN=8)

Makers that need to preserve annotations from a class namespace should use
``annotationlib.get_annotate_from_class_namespace`` rather than accessing
implementation-specific namespace entries directly.

Some makers need to mutate the namespace after the body has executed but
before the class object is created.  The following maker creates slotted
classes by reading the annotations written by the class body and inserting a
``__slots__`` tuple before calling the metaclass::

    import annotationlib
    import types

    class SlottedMaker:
        def __make__(self, func, name, *bases, **kwds):
            def exec_body(ns):
                types.exec_class_body(func, ns)
                annotate = annotationlib.get_annotate_from_class_namespace(ns)
                annotations = annotationlib.call_annotate_function(
                    annotate, annotationlib.Format.STRING)
                ns["__slots__"] = tuple(annotations)

            return types.new_class(name, bases, kwds, exec_body)

    slotted = SlottedMaker()

    make slotted C:
        a: int

    print(C.__slots__)  # ("a",)

This example deliberately omits details that a production-quality slotted
dataclass maker would need, such as inherited slots and class-level field
defaults.


Rationale
=========

Python has various constructs that are somewhat like classes, but behave
subtly (or not so subtly!) differently. This PEP proposes a generic, flexible
mechanism for defining such constructs.

An alternative could be to add specific syntax for some or all of the constructs
for which this PEP proposes to use makers. For example, ``protocol`` could
be made a soft keyword, allowing protocols to be written as proposed in this PEP,
but without an import and without a more powerful new language feature.

However, this would unduly privilege the standard library. There are use
cases in third-party frameworks that could be helped by maker syntax, including
alternative dataclass-like frameworks, ORMs, or DSLs.


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

This proposal adds a new soft keyword use of ``make`` before a pair of names.
Code using ``make`` as an ordinary name remains valid outside this syntactic
position.


Security Implications
=====================

This feature does not introduce any new attack surface. Makers can execute
arbitrary code, but this is already true for pre-existing class definitions: an
attacker-controlled metaclass, base class, or decorator can also execute arbitrary code.


How to Teach This
=================

I recommend that teachers introduce concepts such as dataclasses, enums,
and protocols using the new maker syntax. This allows students to
learn the new concepts without needing to understand the more complex machinery
of decorators and metaclasses.

The general maker concept is a more advanced topic that can be introduced
along with other metaprogramming techniques such as metaclasses.


Reference Implementation
========================

A prototype implementation exists in a `draft PR <https://github.com/JelleZijlstra/cpython/pull/5>`__.


Rejected Ideas
==============

Bare maker syntax
-----------------

An earlier version of this proposal used a bare maker name before the class
name::

    dataclass InventoryItem:
        name: str
        unit_price: float

This was rejected in favor of the explicit ``make`` prefix.  The bare form is
shorter, but it makes many misspellings of existing compound statements parse
as maker definitions.  For example, ``elseif condition:`` or ``classe C:``
would no longer be syntax errors; they would instead try to look up makers
named ``elseif`` or ``classe`` at runtime.  The parser also has to distinguish
the bare form from the grammar for ``match`` and ``case`` statements, which
creates confusing edge cases around soft keywords. For example, a ``match``
block with a single invalid ``case`` in it might get misparsed as a nested
set of maker definitions instead of a syntax error.

The bare form would also consume syntax that Python may later want to reserve
for native forms.  For example, if a future Python version wanted to add a
real ``dataclass`` soft keyword with dedicated semantics, an existing generic
``dataclass C:`` maker form would make that migration more difficult.  The
``make`` prefix keeps maker definitions in their own syntactic space while
leaving forms such as ``dataclass C:`` or ``protocol P:`` available for future
proposals.


Allowing arbitrary maker expressions
--------------------------------------

The PEP does not allow syntax such as ``make dataclasses.dataclass C:`` or
``make factory() C:``.  Such forms are more flexible, but they make the grammar
and visual shape of the feature less clear.  A module attribute or computed
maker can be assigned to a local name before use.


Open Issues
===========

* What should the shape of the AST be? A new field on ``ClassDef``, or a new ``MakerDef`` node?
* Should we allow makers to be something other than bare names? ``make dataclasses.dataclass C:``?
* What should the signature of the ``__make__`` method be? Should it be passed something other than
  the internal class body function? Should there be a ``__prepare__`` hook?
* Should the ``dataclass_transform`` behavior have any enhancements? Some way to inject a base class or metaclass?
* For enums, do we need more variants for flags and intenums etc.?
* Could we usefully make protocol and typeddict definitions using makers lazy, where it does not evaluate the
  class body until we need it at runtime?
* In standard library maker definitions, how should keyword args to the maker itself interact with
  keyword args that the class needs? Perhaps the dataclass maker should support a ``class_kwargs`` parameter
  to pass additional arguments to the class constructor.


Acknowledgements
================

I thank all the people at PyCon US who humored me when I started talking about this idea.
Pablo Galindo Salgado suggested adding an additional keyword to make the syntax more palatable.


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
