PEP: 8106
Title: 2025 Term Steering Council election
Author: Ee Durbin <ee@python.org>
Sponsor: Thomas Wouters <thomas@python.org>
Status: Final
Type: Informational
Topic: Governance
Created: 21-Oct-2024


Abstract
========

This document describes the schedule and other details of the
2024 election for the Python steering council, as specified in
:pep:`13`. This is the steering council election for the 2025 term
(i.e. Python 3.14).


Election Administration
=======================

The steering council appointed the
`Python Software Foundation <https://www.python.org/psf-landing/>`__
Director of Infrastructure, Ee Durbin, to administer the election.


Schedule
========

There was a two-week nomination period, followed by a two-week
vote.

The nomination period was: November 7, 2024 through `November 21, 2024 AoE
<https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=Python+Steering+Council+nominations+close&iso=20241122T00&p1=3399>`_ [#note-aoe]_.

The voting period was: November 25, 2024 through `December 9, 2024 AoE
<https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=Python+Steering+Council+voting+closes&iso=20241210T00&p1=3399>`_ [#note-aoe]_.


Candidates
==========

Candidates must be nominated by a core team member. If the candidate
is a core team member, they may nominate themselves.

Nominees (in alphabetical order by first name):

- `Barry Warsaw <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nominations-barry-warsaw-2025-term/71732/>`_
- `Donghee Na <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-donghee-na-2025-term/71731>`_
- `Emily Morehouse <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-emily-morehouse-2025-term/71824>`_
- `Ethan Furman <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-ethan-furman-2025-term/71899>`_
- `Gregory P. Smith <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-gregory-p-smith-2025-term/71947>`_
- `Mariatta <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-mariatta-2025-term/71950>`_
- `Pablo Galindo Salgado <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-pablo-galindo-salgado-2025-term/71915>`_
- `Thomas Wouters <https://discuss.python.org/t/steering-council-nomination-thomas-wouters-2025-term/71792>`_

Withdrawn nominations:

- None

Voter Roll
==========

All active Python core team members are eligible to vote. Active status
is determined as :pep:`described in PEP 13 <13#membership>`
and implemented via the software at `python/voters <https://github.com/python/voters>`_
[#note-voters]_.

Ballots were distributed based on the the `Python Voter Roll
<https://github.com/python/voters/blob/master/voter-files/>`_ [#note-voters]_
for this election.

While this file is not public as it contains private email addresses, the
`Complete Voter Roll`_ is available with a list of all eligible voters by name.

Election Implementation
=======================

The election was conducted using the `Helios Voting Service
<https://heliosvoting.org>`__.


Configuration
-------------

Short name: ``2025-python-steering-council``

Name: ``2025 Python Steering Council Election``

Description: ``Election for the Python steering council, as specified in PEP 13. This is steering council election for the 2025 term.``

type: ``Election``

Use voter aliases: ``[X]``

Randomize answer order: ``[X]``

Private: ``[X]``

Help Email Address: ``psf-election@python.org``

Voting starts at: ``November 25, 2024 12:00 UTC``

Voting ends at: ``December 10, 2024 12:00 UTC``

This will create an election in which:

* Voting is not open to the public, only those on the `Voter Roll`_ may
  participate. Ballots will be emailed when voting starts.
* Candidates are presented in random order, to help avoid bias.
* Voter identities and ballots are protected against cryptographic advances.

Questions
---------

Question 1
~~~~~~~~~~

Select between ``0`` and ``- (approval)`` answers. Result Type: ``absolute``

Question: ``Select candidates for the Python Steering Council``

Answer #1 - #N: ``Candidates from Candidates_ Section``



Results
=======

Of 100 eligible voters, 76 cast ballots.

The top five vote-getters are:

* Barry Warsaw
* Donghee Na
* Emily Morehouse
* Gregory P. Smith
* Pablo Galindo Salgado

No conflict of interest as defined in :pep:`13` were observed.

The full vote counts are as follows:

+-----------------------+----------------+
| Candidate             | Votes Received |
+=======================+================+
| Barry Warsaw          | 58             |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| Donghee Na            | 48             |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| Emily Morehouse       | 52             |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| Ethan Furman          | 31             |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| Gregory P. Smith      | 50             |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| Mariatta              | 23             |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| Pablo Galindo Salgado | 63             |
+-----------------------+----------------+
| Thomas Wouters        | 38             |
+-----------------------+----------------+


Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.


Complete Voter Roll
===================

Active Python core developers
-----------------------------

.. code-block:: text

   Adam Turner
   Alex Gaynor
   Alex Waygood
   Alexander Belopolsky
   Alyssa Coghlan
   Ammar Askar
   Andrew Svetlov
   Antoine Pitrou
   Barney Gale
   Barry Warsaw
   Batuhan Taskaya
   Benjamin Peterson
   Berker Peksağ
   Brandt Bucher
   Brett Cannon
   Brian Curtin
   C.A.M. Gerlach
   CF Bolz-Tereick
   Carl Meyer
   Carol Willing
   Cheryl Sabella
   Chris Withers
   Christian Heimes
   Dennis Sweeney
   Dino Viehland
   Donghee Na
   Emily Morehouse
   Éric Araujo
   Eric Snow
   Eric V. Smith
   Erlend Egeberg Aasland
   Ethan Furman
   Ezio Melotti
   Facundo Batista
   Filipe Laíns
   Fred Drake
   Georg Brandl
   Giampaolo Rodolà
   Gregory P. Smith
   Guido van Rossum
   Hugo van Kemenade
   Hynek Schlawack
   Inada Naoki
   Irit Katriel
   Ivan Levkivskyi
   Jack Jansen
   Jason R. Coombs
   Jelle Zijlstra
   Jeremy Hylton
   Jeremy Kloth
   Jesús Cea
   Joannah Nanjekye
   Julien Palard
   Karthikeyan Singaravelan
   Ken Jin
   Kirill Podoprigora
   Kumar Aditya
   Kurt B. Kaiser
   Kushal Das
   Kyle Stanley
   Larry Hastings
   Łukasz Langa
   Lysandros Nikolaou
   Marc-André Lemburg
   Mariatta
   Mark Shannon
   Matt Page
   Michael Droettboom
   Nathaniel J. Smith
   Ned Batchelder
   Ned Deily
   Neil Schemenauer
   Nikita Sobolev
   Pablo Galindo
   Paul Ganssle
   Paul Moore
   Petr Viktorin
   Pradyun Gedam
   R. David Murray
   Raymond Hettinger
   Ronald Oussoren
   Russell Keith-Magee
   Sam Gross
   Savannah Ostrowski
   Senthil Kumaran
   Serhiy Storchaka
   Shantanu Jain
   Stefan Behnel
   Steve Dower
   Stéphane Wirtel
   Tal Einat
   Terry Jan Reedy
   Thomas Wouters
   Tian Gao
   Tim Golden
   Tim Peters
   Victor Stinner
   Vinay Sajip
   Yury Selivanov
   Zachary Ware


.. [#note-voters] This repository is private and accessible only to Python Core
   Developers, administrators, and Python Software Foundation Staff as it
   contains personal email addresses.
.. [#note-aoe] AoE: `Anywhere on Earth <https://www.ieee802.org/16/aoe.html>`_.
