PEP: 760
Title: No More Bare Excepts
Author: Pablo Galindo <pablogsal@python.org>, Brett Cannon <brett@python.org>
Status: Withdrawn
Type: Standards Track
Created: 02-Oct-2024
Python-Version: 3.14
Post-History: `09-Oct-2024 <https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-760-no-more-bare-excepts/67182>`__


Abstract
========

This PEP proposes disallowing bare ``except:`` clauses in Python's
exception-handling syntax. Currently, Python allows catching all exceptions
with a bare ``except:`` clause, which can lead to overly broad exception
handling and mask important errors. This PEP suggests requiring explicit
exception types in all except clauses, promoting more precise and intentional
error handling.

Motivation
==========

The current syntax allows for catching all exceptions with a bare ``except:`` clause:

.. code-block:: python

   try:
       risky_operation()
   except:
       handle_any_error()

While this syntax can be convenient for a "catch all" handler, it often leads
to poor coding practices:

1. It can mask important errors that should be propagated.
2. It makes debugging more difficult by catching and potentially hiding
   unexpected exceptions.
3. It goes against the Python principle of explicit over implicit.

Various linters [1]_ [2]_ [3]_ and style guides (including :pep:`8`) [4]_ [5]_
[6]_ [7]_ discourage bare ``except`` clauses.

By requiring explicit exception types, we can encourage more thoughtful and
precise error handling:

.. code-block:: python

   try:
       risky_operation()
   except Exception as e:
       handle_expected_error(e)

Another view of this problem is that bare except handlers are ambiguous
regarding the intended handling of terminating exceptions, as the intention
could have been either:

* Only catch non-terminating exceptions (``except Exception:``). If this was the
  intention, using a bare ``except:`` is an outright bug, since that isn't what it
  means.
* Catch all exceptions, including terminating ones (``except BaseException:``).
  using bare ``except:`` here it is at least correct, but readers need to check
  to be sure it isn't an instance of the first case.

Since both possible intentions have available unambiguous spellings, the
ambiguous form is redundant and that's why we propose to disallow it.

Rationale
=========

The decision to disallow bare except clauses is based on the following
considerations:

1. Requiring specific exception types makes the programmer's intentions clear
   and encourages thinking about what exceptions might occur.

2. Catching only specific exceptions makes identifying and debugging unexpected
   errors easier.

3. Preventing overly broad exception handling reduces the risk of silently
   ignoring critical errors.

4. Many style guides and linters already discourage the use of bare except
   clauses.


Specification
=============

The syntax for the except clause will be modified to require an exception type.
The grammar will be updated to remove the possibility of adding an empty
expression in except clauses.

This change disallows the bare ``except:`` syntax. All except clauses must
specify at least one exception type:

.. code-block:: python

   try:
       ...
   except ValueError:
       ...
   except (TypeError, RuntimeError):
       ...
   except Exception:
       ...  # Still allowed, but catches all exceptions explicitly

The semantics of exception handling remain unchanged, except that it will no
longer be possible to catch all exceptions without explicitly specifying
``BaseException`` or a similarly broad exception type.


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

This change is not backwards compatible. Existing code that uses bare ``except:``
clauses will need to be modified. To ease the transition:

1. A deprecation warning will be issued for bare except clauses in Python 3.14.
2. The syntax will be fully disallowed in Python 3.17.
3. A ``from __future__ import strict_excepts`` will be provided to invalidate bare
   except handlers in earlier versions of Python.

A tool will be provided to automatically update code to replace bare ``except:``
with ``except BaseException:``.


Security Implications
=====================

This change has no security implications.


How to Teach This
=================

For new Python users, exception handling should be taught with explicit
exception types from the start:

.. code-block:: python

   try:
       result = risky_operation()
   except ValueError:
       handle_value_error()
   except TypeError:
       handle_type_error()
   except Exception as e:
       handle_unexpected_error(e)

For experienced users, the change can be introduced as a best practice that is
now enforced by the language. The following points should be emphasized:

1. Always catch specific exceptions when possible.
2. Use ``except Exception:`` as a last resort for truly unexpected errors.
3. Never silence exceptions without careful consideration.

Documentation should guide common exception hierarchies and how to choose
appropriate exception types to catch.

Rejected ideas
==============

* There are genuine cases where the use of bare ``except:`` handlers are correct. one
  of the examples that have been raised from Mailman [8]_ involves handling transactions
  in the face of any exception:

   .. code-block:: python

       @contextmanager
       def transaction():
           """Context manager for ensuring the transaction is complete."""
           try:
               yield
           except:
               config.db.abort()
               raise
           else:
               config.db.commit()

  This code guarantees that no matter what exception occurs, any open
  transaction will be aborted, while in the successful condition, the
  transaction will be committed.

  We do believe that although there are cases such like this one where
  bare ``except:`` handlers are correct, it would be better to actually
  be explicit and use ``except BaseException:`` for the reasons indicated
  in the "Motivation" section.


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.

.. [1] https://pylint.pycqa.org/en/latest/user_guide/messages/warning/bare-except.html
.. [2] https://www.flake8rules.com/rules/E722.html
.. [3] https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules/bare-except/
.. [4] https://google.github.io/styleguide/pyguide.html#24-exceptions
.. [5] https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromiumos/platform/factory/+/HEAD/CODING_STYLE.md#Avoid-bare_except
.. [6] https://4.docs.plone.org/develop/plone-coredev/style.html#concrete-rules
.. [7] https://docs.openedx.org/en/latest/developers/references/developer_guide/style_guides/python-guidelines.html
.. [8] https://gitlab.com/mailman/mailman/-/blob/master/src/mailman/database/transaction.py#L27
