PEP: 829
Title: Package Startup Configuration Files
Author: Barry Warsaw <barry@python.org>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-829-structured-startup-configuration-via-site-toml-files/106789
Status: Accepted
Type: Standards Track
Created: 31-Mar-2026
Python-Version: 3.15
Post-History:
    `01-Apr-2026 <https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-829-structured-startup-configuration-files/106789>`__,
    `13-Apr-2026 <https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-829-structured-startup-configuration-files/106789/69>`__,
    `15-Apr-2026 <https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-829-structured-startup-configuration-files/106789/99>`__
Resolution: `24-Apr-2026 <https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-829-structured-startup-configuration-files/106789/112>`__


Abstract
========

This PEP changes the way packages influence Python's startup process.
Previously controlled through legacy ``.pth`` files parsed and executed by the
``site.py`` file during interpreter startup, such files are used to extend
``sys.path`` and execute package initialization code before control is passed
to the first line of user code.

This PEP proposes:

* A 3 year deprecation period for the processing of ``import`` lines in ``.pth``
  files, after which ``import`` lines in ``.pth`` files will be silently
  ignored.
* A 5 year period after which a warning will be produced for the existence of
  ``import`` lines in ``.pth`` files.
* Introducing a new ``.start`` file parallel to ``.pth`` files which list
  entry points (as ``pkg.mod:callable``) to execute by the ``site.py`` module.
* The presence of a matching ``.start`` file disables ``import`` line
  processing in ``.pth`` files.
* The ``sys.path`` extension functionality of ``.pth`` files is retained.


Motivation
==========

Python's ``.pth`` files (processed by ``Lib/site.py`` at startup)
support two functions:

* **Extending** ``sys.path`` -- Lines in this file (excluding comments
  and lines that start with ``import``) name directories to be
  appended to ``sys.path``.  Relative paths are implicitly anchored at
  the site-packages directory.

* **Executing arbitrary code** -- lines starting with ``import`` (or
  ``import\\t``) are executed immediately by passing the source string
  to ``exec()``.

While there are valid use cases for both, the ``import`` line feature is the
most problematic because:

* Code execution is a side effect of the implementation.  Lines that
  start with ``import`` can be extended by separating multiple
  statements with a semicolon.  As long as all the code to be
  executed appears on the same line, it all gets executed when the
  ``.pth`` file is processed.

* ``import`` lines are executed using ``exec()`` during interpreter
  startup, which opens a broad attack surface.

* There is no explicit concept of an entry point, which is an established
  pattern in Python packaging.  Packages that require code execution and
  initialization at startup abuse ``import`` lines rather than explicitly
  declaring entry points.


Specification
=============

This PEP proposes the following:

* Keep the ``<name>.pth`` file format, but deprecate ``import`` line
  processing for three years, after which such lines will be disallowed.

* Keep the current ``sys.path`` extension feature of ``<name>.pth`` files
  unchanged.  Specifically, absolute paths are used verbatim while relative
  paths are anchored at the directory in which the ``.pth`` file is located.

* A new file format called ``<name>.start`` is added which names entry points
  conforming to the "colon-form" of :func:`pkgutil.resolve_name` arguments.

* During the deprecation period, the presence of a ``<name>.start`` file
  matching a ``<name>.pth`` file disables the execution of ``import`` lines in
  the ``<name>.pth`` file in favor of entry points from the ``<name>.start``
  file.  This provides a migration path straddling Python versions which
  support this PEP and earlier versions which do not.  In this case, warnings
  about ``import`` lines are *not* printed.

  During the deprecation period, for any ``<name>.pth`` file without a
  matching ``<name>.start`` file, the processing of the former is unchanged,
  although a warning about ``import`` lines is issued when ``-v`` (verbose)
  flag is given to Python.

  After the deprecation period ``import`` lines in ``<name>.pth`` files are
  ignored and a warning is issued, regardless of whether there is a matching
  ``<name>.start`` file or not.

  See the :ref:`teach` section for specific migration guidelines.

.. _dash-S: https://docs.python.org/3/using/cmdline.html#cmdoption-S

Both ``<name>.pth`` and ``<name>.start`` files are processed by the
``site.py`` module, just like current ``.pth`` files.  This means that
`disabling site.py processing <dash-S_>`__ with ``-S`` disables processing of
both files.

``site.py`` start up code is divided into these explicit phases:

#. Find the ``<name>.pth`` files (see :ref:`discovery` for additional details)
   and sort them in alphabetical order by filename.

#. Parse the ``<name>.pth`` files in sorted order, keeping a global list of
   all path extensions, preserving order file-by-file and then by entry
   appearance. Duplicates are ignored.

#. During the deprecation period, collect ``import`` lines found from
   ``<name>.pth`` files.  Processing of these lines is deferred until after
   ``<name>.start`` file scanning.

#. *Future extension:* apply a :ref:`global policy filter <future>` on the
   list of path extensions.

#. Append path extensions to ``sys.path`` in the global preserved order.

#. List all ``<name>.start`` files (see :ref:`discovery` for additional
   details) and sort them in alphabetical order by filename.

   For any ``<name>.start`` that matches a previously scanned ``<name>.pth``
   file, discard all ``import`` lines from those matched ``<name>.pth`` files.
   See the :ref:`teach` section for more details and rationale.

#. Parse the ``<name>.start`` files in sorted order, keeping a global list of
   all entry points, preserving order file-by-file and then by entry
   appearance.  Duplicates are :ref:`not ignored <duplicate-eps>`.

#. *Future extension:* apply a :ref:`global policy filter <future>` on the
   list of entry points.

#. For each entry point in preserved order, use :func:`pkgutil.resolve_name`
   to resolve the entry point into a callable.  Call the entry point with no
   arguments and any return value is discarded.  The resolved object is not
   tested for callability before it is called (and thus any ``TypeError`` that
   might result is reported).

In both ``<name>.pth`` files and ``<name>.start`` files, comment lines
(i.e. lines beginning with ``#`` as the first non-whitespace character) and
blank lines are ignored.  Any other parsing error causes the line to be
ignored.


.. _ep-syntax:

Entry point syntax
------------------

:func:`pkgutil.resolve_name` is used to resolve an entry point specification
into a callable object.  However, in Python 3.14 and earlier, this function
accepts two forms, described in the documentation with pseudo-regular
expressions:

* ``W(.W)*`` - no colon form
* ``W(.W)*:(W(.W)*)?`` - colon form with optional callable suffix

This PEP proposes to only allow ``pkg.mod:callable`` form of entry points, and
requires that the callable be specified.  See the :ref:`open issues
<open-issues>` for further discussion.


.. _discovery:

File Naming and Discovery
-------------------------

* Packages may optionally install zero or more files of the format
  ``<name>.pth`` and ``<name>.start``.  The ``<name>`` prefix is arbitrary and
  need not match the package name or each other, although all else being
  equal, it is recommended that they do match the package name for clarity.
  The interpreter does not enforce any constraints on the prefix.

* Files are processed in alphabetical order.

* ``<name>.start`` files live in the same site-packages directories where
  ``<name>.pth`` files are found today.  The ``<name>.pth`` location stays the
  same.

* The discovery rules for ``<name>.start`` files are the same as with
  ``<name>.pth`` files today.  File names that start with a single ``.``
  (e.g. ``.start``) and files with OS-level hidden attributes (``UF_HIDDEN``,
  ``FILE_ATTRIBUTE_HIDDEN``) are excluded.


Error Handling
--------------

During parsing, errors are generally skipped and only reported when ``-v``
(verbose) flag is given to Python.  Unlike with ``.pth`` files currently,
processing does *not* abort for the entire file when an error is encountered.

#. If a ``<name>.pth`` or ``<name>.start`` file cannot be opened or read, it
   is skipped and processing continues to the next file.

#. Invalid entry point specifications are skipped.

During execution, errors are printed to ``sys.stderr`` and processing
continues.

#. Any ``sys.path`` extension directory pointing to an invalid or nonexistent
   path is ignored and processing continues to the next path entry.

#. Exceptions during execution of the entry point are printed and processing
   continues to the next entry point.


Encoding
--------

``<name>.start`` files **MUST** be encoded with `utf-8-sig
<https://docs.python.org/3.14/library/codecs.html#module-encodings.utf_8_sig>`_,
i.e. UTF-8 with optional byte-order mark.

``<name>.pth`` files **SHOULD** also be ``utf-8-sig`` encoded as well.
Currently, decoding ``<name>.pth`` files falls back to the current locale if
not encoded with ``utf-8-sig``, but this PEP deprecates that support for 5
years, after which ``<name>.pth`` files **MUST** be encoded with ``utf-8-sig``
as well.


.. _future:

Future Improvements
-------------------

The introduction of 2-phase processing of ``.pth`` and ``.start`` files gives
us the ability to implement future improvements, where some global site policy
can be applied, providing finer grained control over both ``sys.path``
extension and entry point execution.  One could imagine that after parsing, a
policy could be applied to either allow or deny path extensions or entry
points based on a number of different criteria, such as the ``<name>`` prefix
used to specify the extension, the path locations, or the modules in which the
entry points are defined.

This PEP deliberately leaves the design of such a policy mechanism to a future
specification.


Rationale
=========

A previous iteration of this PEP proposed the use of a unified
``<name>.site.toml`` file with tables to specify metadata, a list of path
extensions, and a list of entry points.  While the PEP author and several
discussion participants liked this structured approach, a number of detractors
expressed the opinion that TOML files were overkill for this proposal.  The
PEP author believes that the processing overhead of TOML files was negligible
and that the structured approach was useful for readability and future
extensibility.  Detractors countered with YAGNI.

The two-file approach is a simple evolutionary improvement over the previous
``.pth`` file process.  The first improvement is the deprecation and removal
of arbitrary code execution through ``exec()`` of ``import`` lines.  Such
lines are a wide attack vector that even the :func:`exec` standard library
documentation strongly warns against.  Replacing these lines with the narrower
invocation of entry point function inside modules indirectly reduces the
attack vector because functions inside modules are easier to audit, both by
humans and automatic vulnerability scanners.

The second improvement is splitting ``sys.path`` extension from entry point
specification into two files, special purposed for the exact use case they
support.  There's no co-mingling of purposes, no possible interleaving of
effects, more readable file formats, and clear processing rules.  ``sys.path``
extensions are processed first, setting up the ability to import modules, and
then entry points are processed.  It's unambiguously clear which file format
supports which use case.

The third improvement is the 2-phase approach to processing these files.
Parsing errors can be reported early and need not terminate the further
processing of lines in each file.  The transition from processing to execution
for both ``sys.path`` extension and entry point invocation gives us a chance
(:ref:`in the future <future>`) to design and implement global policies for
explicitly controlling which path extensions and entry points are allowed (and
by implication, deemed safe), without resorting to the heavy hammer of
`disabling site.py processing <dash-S_>`__ completely.

All valid ``sys.path`` extensions in all ``<name>.pth`` files found are
processed *before* any entry points in ``<name>.start`` files are called.
This is to ensure that all ``sys.path`` modifications required to import entry
point modules are applied first.

.. _duplicate-eps:

Entry points are *not* de-duplicated, regardless of whether they're defined
multiple times in the same ``<name>.start`` file or across more than one
``<name>.start`` file.  This means that if an entry point appears more than
once it will get called more than once.  Unlike with the de-duplication of
``sys.path`` entries (where the appearance of a directory path later on
``sys.path`` than its duplicate has no effect), users could -- however
unlikely -- actually want multiple invocations of their entry points.  This
also avoids the complexity of defining de-duplicating entry point semantics
across independently-authored ``<name>.start`` files.


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

This PEP proposes a 3 year deprecation period for processing of ``import``
lines inside ``.pth`` files.  ``sys.path`` extensions in ``.pth`` files remain
unchanged.

There should always be a simple migration strategy for any packages which
utilize the ``import`` line arbitrary code execution feature of current
``.pth`` files.  They can simply move the code into a callable inside an
importable module inside the package, and then name this callable in an entry
point specification inside a ``<name>.start`` file.


.. _security:

Security Implications
=====================

This PEP makes it easier to audit code execution paths during interpreter startup.

* Splitting ``sys.path`` extension from code execution into two separate
  files means that you can tell by listing the files in the site-dir, exactly
  where arbitrary code execution occurs.

* The removal of arbitrary code execution by :func:`exec` with entry point
  execution, which is more constrained and auditable.

* Python's import system is used to access and run the entry points, so the
  standard audit hooks (:pep:`578`) can provide monitoring.

* The two-phase processing model creates a natural hook where a :ref:`future
  <future>` policy mechanism could inspect and restrict what gets executed.

* The ``package.module:callable`` syntax limits execution to callables within
  importable modules.

The overall pre-start code execution attack surface is not eliminated by this
PEP.  A malicious package can still cause arbitrary code execution via entry
points, but the mechanism proposed in this PEP is more structured, auditable,
and amenable to future policy controls.


.. _teach:

How to Teach This
=================

The :mod:`site` module documentation will be updated to describe the operation
and best practices for ``<name>.pth`` and ``<name>.start`` files.  The
following migration guidelines for package authors will be included:

* If your package currently ships a ``<name>.pth`` file, analyze whether you
  are using it for ``sys.path`` extension or start up code execution.  You can
  keep all the ``sys.path`` extension lines unchanged.

* If you are using the code execution of ``import`` lines feature, create a
  callable (taking zero arguments) within an importable module inside your
  package.  Name these as ``pkg.mod:callable`` entry points in a matching
  ``<name>.start`` file.

* If your package has to straddle older Pythons that don't support this PEP
  and newer Pythons that do, change the ``import`` lines in your
  ``<name>.pth`` to use the following form:

  ``import pkg.mod; pkg.mod.callable()``

  This way, older Pythons will execute these ``import`` lines, and newer
  Pythons will ignore them, using the ``<name>.start`` file instead.  In both
  cases the same code is effectively used, so while there's *some*
  duplication, it is minimal.

* After your straddling period, remove all ``import`` lines from your
  ``<name>.pth`` file.

Non-normatively, build tools may want to emit a warning if a package includes
both a ``<name>.pth`` file and a ``<name>.start`` file where the former
includes ``import`` lines that don't match lines in the latter.


Reference Implementation
=========================

The `reference implementation <https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/147955>`_
supports the current version of this PEP.


Rejected Ideas
==============

Just add entry points to ``.pth`` files and leave the ``import`` lines alone
    This is rejected on the basis of conflation of intent and the migration
    path :ref:`described above <teach>`.  The principle of separation of
    concerns means that it's easy to understand which use case a package is
    utilizing.

``<name>.site.toml`` files
    This was the unified new file format proposed in a previous draft of this
    PEP.  It was generally felt that the structured format of the TOML file
    was overkill, and the overhead of parsing a TOML file wasn't worth the
    future extensibility benefit.

Single configuration file instead of per-package files
    A single site-wide configuration file was considered but rejected because
    it would require coordination between independently installed packages and
    would not mirror the ``<package>.pth`` convention that tools already
    understand.

Priority or weight field for processing order
    Since packages are installed independently, there is no arbiter of
    priority.  Alphabetical ordering matches current ``<name>.pth`` processing
    order.  Priority could be addressed by a future site-wide policy
    configuration file, not per-package metadata.

Passing arguments to callables
    Callables are invoked with no arguments for simplicity and because there
    are no obviously useful arguments to pass to the entry point.

.. _open-issues:

Open Issues
===========

* As described in the :ref:`entry point syntax <ep-syntax>` section, this PEP
  proposes to use a narrow definition of the acceptable object reference
  syntax implemented by :func:`pkgutil.resolve_name`, i.e. specifically
  requiring the ``pkg.mod:callable`` syntax.  This is because we don't want to
  encourage code execution by direct import side-effect (i.e. functionality at
  module scope level).

  Assuming this restriction is acceptable, how this is implemented is an open
  question.  ``site.py`` could enforce it directly, but then that sort of
  defeats the purpose of using :func:`pkgutil.resolve_name`.  The PEP author's
  preference would be to add an optional keyword-only argument to
  :func:`pkgutil.resolve_name`, i.e. ``strict`` defaulting to ``False`` for
  backward compatibility.  ``strict=True`` would narrow the acceptable inputs
  to effectively ``W(.W)*:(W(.W)*)``, namely, rejecting the older, non-colon
  form, and making the callable after the colon required.

* ``site.addpackage()`` is an undocumented function that processes a single
  ``.pth`` file.  It is not listed in ``site.__all__``, not covered in
  `Doc/library/site.rst
  <https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/main/Doc/library/site.rst>`_, and
  has no stability guarantees.  A GitHub code search found roughly half a
  dozen third-party projects calling it directly, mostly with the pattern
  ``site.addpackage(dir, "apps.pth", set())`` — all of which can be replaced
  by ``site.addsitedir(dir)``.

  During the work on the reference implementation, ``addpackage()`` becomes a
  thin wrapper around the new internal pipeline for processing ``.pth`` and
  ``.start`` files.  Maintaining it as a separate functions adds complexity
  for no documented use case.  This function should be deprecated, with the
  suggestion that users migrate to ``addsitedir()`` instead, a documented
  public API.

* The PEP currently recommends a three year deprecation period on the
  *processing* of ``import`` lines in ``.pth`` files.  Packages can straddle
  without warnings because the presence of a matching ``.start`` file
  disables warnings for ``import`` lines in ``.pth`` files *during the
  deprecation period*.  However, as currently written, warnings will be
  re-enabled at the end of the deprecation period, so at that point there
  isn't a way to straddle without warnings.

  The preferred solution is to simply hide all warnings for ``import`` lines
  in ``.pth`` files behind the ``-v`` (verbose) flag, either for a full 5 year
  period (keeping the 3 year *processing* deprecation timeline), or
  indefinitely.

* Should future ``-X`` options provide fine-grained control over error
  reporting or entry point execution?

* This PEP does not address the use of ``._pth`` `files
  <https://docs.python.org/3/library/sys_path_init.html#pth-files>`_ because
  the purpose and behavior is completely different, despite the similar name.


Change History
==============

``19-Apr-2026``

* Added a description of the encoding requirements for ``<name>.start`` and
  ``<name>.pth`` files.
* Update the migration guidelines.

`15-Apr-2026 <https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-829-structured-startup-configuration-files/106789/99>`__

* During the deprecation period, warnings about ``import`` lines in
  ``<name>.pth`` files with no matching ``<name>.start`` file are only issued
  when ``-v`` (verbose) is given.
* Clarify that ``import`` lines in ``<name>.pth`` files where there is a
  matching ``<name>.start`` file are ignored.
* Added some :ref:`open issues <open-issues>` around ``site.addpackage()``
  deprecation, and extending the suppression of ``import`` line warnings in
  ``.pth`` files unless ``-v`` is given, for an additional two years.

`13-Apr-2026 <https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-829-structured-startup-configuration-files/106789/69>`__

* Changed the PEP title.
* The PEP is no longer in the ``Packaging`` Topic.
* The PEP now proposes an evolution of the ``<name>.pth`` file format and the
  addition of the ``<name>.start`` file for entry point specification.  The
  ``<name>.site.toml`` file from the previous version is removed.
* A three year deprecation of ``import`` lines in ``.pth`` files is proposed.


Acknowledgments
===============

The PEP author thanks Paul Moore for the constructive and pleasant
conversation leading to the compromise from the first draft of this proposal
to its current form.  Thanks also go to Emma Smith and Brett Cannon for their
feedback and encouragement.


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
