PEP: 790
Title: New environment markers for modern Python environments
Author: Klaus Zimmermann <klaus_zimmermann@gmx.de>,
        Ralf Gommers <ralf.gommers@gmail.com>
Sponsor: <name of sponsor>
PEP-Delegate: <PEP delegate's name>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/environment-marker-for-free-threading/60007
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Created: 21-Feb-2025
Python-Version: 3.14
Post-History: <REQUIRED: dates, in dd-mmm-yyyy format, and corresponding links to PEP discussion threads>

..
    If adopted, the contents of this pep should be integrated into the canonical
    documentation in the Python Packaging User Guide and the following
    directive should be added here:
    .. canonical-pypa-spec:: :ref:`packaging:dependency-specifiers`

Abstract
========

This PEP defines new environment markers for package dependencies.
:pep:`508` (later moved to :ref:`packaging:dependency-specifiers`) introduced
environment markers to specify dependencies based on a rule that describes
when the dependency should be used.
This PEP extends the environment markers to allow specifying dependencies
based on specific abi features of the Python interpreter.
For this, it defines a set of `ABI features`_ and specifies how they are made
available via an `Addition to the Python Standard Library`_ in the form of a
new attribute ``sys.abi_features``, as well as for `Environment markers`_ as a
new marker variable, ``sys_abi_features``.

The addition to the standard library will simplify the implementation of the
new environment markers for new Python versions, however, it is not required to
add the new environment markers, as the ``sys_abi_features`` variable is syntax
that can readily be implemented for Python versions without the new attribute
in the tooling, as demonstrated in the `Reference Implementation`_.

Motivation
==========

:pep:`508` established environment markers to specify dependencies based on
environment conditions.
Since its adoption in 2015, the Python ecosystem has evolved and new features
warrant their own environment markers.

One such feature is the introduction of Python interpreters without the Global
Interpreter Lock (GIL), which allows for free threading
[#python-free-threading]_.

Some real world issues that are addressed by this PEP include the following:

- Cython has support for free-threading only in its master branch, and is used
  by a lot of projects that already publish cp313t wheels. Picking up the wrong
  Cython version is causing a lot of obscure build failures or runtime crashes.
  It would be quite beneficial if the metadata could express that
  (c.f. `Require Cython pre-release for free-threading Python`_).
- CFFI has no support for free-threading yet, and the maintainers have stated
  that it may be a good idea to fork cffi, ensure it starts working with
  free-threading, and only come back to the CFFI project with a single large PR
  that adds support after the functionality "is reasonably well-tested (either
  as tests or, better in this case, tested by being in use in various other
  projects)". There are a lot of projects that depend on cffi. They are likely
  fine to start depending on a fork for free-threading only, however depending
  on a fork for >=3.13 or for all Python versions seems like a much larger ask,
  and more disruptive for distro packagers, for example.

Another feature that is not yet covered by environment markers is the bitness
of the interpreter, which is relevant for some packages that provide C
extensions. For example, Scipy does not provide win32 wheels, which can be
awkward for projects where Scipy is an optional dependency only. In that case,
it would be useful to be able to specify that Scipy is required *unless* the
interpreter is 32-bit win32 (c.f. `Require Scipy unless on 32-bit win32`_).


Rationale
=========

The intention of this PEP is to introduce its core features with minimal impact
on the existing ecosystem.
The existing grammar proposed in :pep:`508` lends itself to a straightforward
extension to include the new environment marker.

The Python standard library already has one mechanism to provide information
about the ABI of the interpreter, namely the ``sys.abiflags`` attribute.
This attribute is a string that contains a number of flags, such as ``d`` for
debug builds, but it is not easily understood and not uniformly available.
The new ``sys.abi_features`` attribute is both and is designed to be a superset
of the information contained in ``sys.abiflags``, which is why we chose to
include the ``debug`` feature.

:pep:`703`, which is the accepted proposal for free threading, states that the
roll-out of free-threading Python should be gradual, which has been clarified
by the Python Steering Council in `the acceptance post
<https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-703-making-the-global-interpreter-lock-optional-in-cpython-acceptance/37075>`_
to mean a three stage process over multiple releases.
It is therefore important to make sure that the mechanisms in this PEP are
useable for Python interpreters where either free-threading or
non-free-threading could be the default or the only option.

At the time of writing, free-threading Python is in Phase I: experimental phase.
In this phase, there is an acute need for the proposed environment markers to
help with the transition to free-threading Python as package authors gradually
add support.

As the number of packages with support increases, and particularly during
Phase II: Supported-but-not-default phase, we still anticipate a strong need
for the environment markers to help with the transition.

As free-threading Python enters into Phase III: Default phase, the need for
the environment markers will decrease, though at this point it is not clear
that the GIL-enabled Python will be completely phased out (it may remain
available as a non standard build option). If it persists, the inverse need for
the ABI feature detection may arise.

Indeed, in all three phases it may be necessary for package authors to chose
specific versions of their dependencies based on the ABI features, with a shift
from GIL-enabled as default to free-threading as default over time.

The ABI features are designed with this in mind to guarantee usefulness and
simplicity for the foreseeable future in a changing Python ecosystem.

Specification
=============

Teaser
------

To give an idea of the new environment marker, here is a simple example.
For further examples, see the `Examples`_ section below.

Dependencies can be marked as required for a free threading build of python
using the following syntax::

    cython; "free-threading" in sys_abi_features

or, explicitly for a non-free threading build::

    cython; "free-threading" not in sys_abi_features

Concepts
--------

ABI features are a clear description of certain properties of the Python
interpreter. While some of these features can be queried already today, they
are not easily nor uniformly accessible.

Hence, the proposed feature MUST be made available via the Python standard
library as ``sys.abi_features``, and as the new environment marker variable
``sys_abi_features``.

ABI Features
''''''''''''

ABI features are intrinsic properties of the Python interpreter, expressed as
simple, understandable strings.
However, not all feature are equally applicable to all Python interpreters. For
example, the distinction between free-threading and GIL-enabled interpreters is
only relevant for CPython, but the bitness of the interpreter is relevant for
all interpreters.

All interpreters MUST handle the following ABI features as stated.
ABI features that are restricted to particular interpreters MUST NOT be
provided by other interpreters.

``free-threading`` or ``gil-enabled`` (only CPython)
    If the Python interpreter is free-threading, the ``free-threading`` feature
    MUST be present and the ``gil-enabled`` feature MUST NOT be present.
    Otherwise, the ``gil-enabled`` feature MUST be present and the
    ``free-threading`` feature MUST NOT be present.

``debug`` (only CPython)
    This ABI feature is reserved for the ``--with-pydebug`` build of CPython.
    If the interpreter is a CPython interpreter with ``Py_DEBUG`` capabilities,
    the ``debug`` feature MUST be present.
    On Unix systems, this corresponds to ``"d" in sys.abiflags``.

``32-bit`` or ``64-bit``
    The bitness of the interpreter, that is, whether it is a 32-bit or 64-bit
    build [#bitness]_.
    
    If the interpreter is a 32-bit build, the ``32-bit`` feature MUST be
    present and the ``64-bit`` feature MUST NOT be present.

    If the interpreter is a 64-bit build, the ``64-bit`` feature MUST be
    present and the ``32-bit`` feature MUST NOT be present.

    If the interpreter is neither, both features MUST NOT be present.

Addition to the Python Standard Library
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Making the ABI features available in an easily accessible, expressive,
standardized way is useful beyond the scope of environment markers.
For example, ``"32-bit" in sys.abi_features`` is much more expressive than the
current standard test of comparing ``sys.maxsize`` with  ``2**32``, which can
be found more than tenthousand times on GitHub.
If one wants to determine whether the interpreter is a debug build, there is
currently no standardized, cross platform way to do so.
Hence, the `ABI features`_ listed above are added to the Python standard
library.

Since they are all the result of compile time choices describing basic features
of the interpreter, the most intuitive place to put them is in ``sys``.
Since there is no intrinsic order, nor a possibility for duplication, they are
added as a ``frozenset`` of strings.

All Python interpreters MUST provide the ``sys.abi_features`` attribute as a
``frozenset`` of strings, which MUST contain only the `ABI features`_ that are
defined in this PEP or in a subsequent PEP.

An example value would be ``sys.abi_features == {"free-threading",
"debug", "32-bit"}`` on a free-threading debug build for win32.

Environment Markers
'''''''''''''''''''

To make ABI features available in dependency specifications, a new environment
marker variable, ``sys_abi_features``, is added to the format of dependency
specifiers with the same semantics as the ``sys.abi_features`` attribute
proposed above.

To do this, we need to extend the grammar laid out in :pep:`508` and maintained
in the :ref:`packaging:dependency-specifiers` and document the possible values.

The grammar is extended to include the ``sys_abi_features`` marker variable by
augmenting the definition of ``env_var`` as follows::

    env_var       = ('python_version' | 'python_full_version' |
                     'os_name' | 'sys_platform' | 'platform_release' |
                     'platform_system' | 'platform_version' |
                     'platform_machine' | 'platform_python_implementation' |
                     'implementation_name' | 'implementation_version' |
                     'sys_abi_features' |
                     'extra' # ONLY when defined by a containing layer
                     )

Like the grammar, also the overview table of environment markers in
:ref:`packaging:dependency-specifiers` is augmented to add the following row:

.. list-table::
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Marker
      - Python equivalent
      - Sample values
    * - ``sys_abi_features``
      - ``sys.abi_features`` [#sys-abi-features]_
      - ``set()``, ``{"free-threading"}``, ``{"free-threading", "debug"}``

With these additions, ABI features can be used in dependency specifications via
the ``in`` operator to test for the presence of a feature, or the ``not in``
operator to test for the absence of a feature.

Note that the presence of ``sys.abi_features`` in the Python standard library
makes implementation particularly easy for new Python versions, but its absence
in older versions does not prevent the implementation of the new environment
markers, as demonstrated in the `Reference Implementation`_.

Examples
========

Require Cython pre-release for free-threading Python
----------------------------------------------------
To require a pre-release of Cython only for a free-threading Python
interpreter, the following dependency specification can be used::

    cython >3.1.0a1; "free-threading" in sys_abi_features
    cython ==3.0.*; "free-threading" not in sys_abi_features

Require Scipy unless on 32-bit win32
------------------------------------
To require Scipy unless on a 32-bit win32 interpreter, the following
dependency specification can be used::

    scipy; platform_system != "Windows" or "32-bit" not in sys_abi_features

Require Numpy for a free-threading interpreter with debugging capabilities
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
To require Numpy only for a free-threading interpreter with debugging
capabilities, the following dependency can be used::

    numpy; "free-threading" in sys_abi_features and "debug" in sys_abi_features

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

This is a pure extension to the existing environment markers and does not
affect existing environment markers or dependency specifications, hence there
are no direct backwards compatibility concerns.

However, the introduction of the feature has implications for a
number of ecosystem tools, especially those which attempt to support
examination of data in ``pyproject.toml`` and ``requirements.txt``.

Audit and Update Tools
----------------------

A wide range of tools understand Python dependency data as expressed in
``requirements.txt`` files. (e.g., Dependabot, Tidelift, etc)

Such tools inspect dependency data and, in some cases, offer tool-assisted or
fully automated updates.
It is our expectation that no such tools would support the new environment
markers at first, and broad ecosystem support could take many months or even
some number of years to arrive.

As a result, users of the new environment markers would experience a
degradation in their workflows and tool support at the time that they start
using them. This is true of any new standard for where and how dependency data
are encoded.

Security Implications
=====================

This PEP introduces new syntaxes for specifying dependency information in
projects. However, it does not introduce newly specified mechanisms for
handling or resolving dependencies.

It therefore does not carry security concerns other than those inherent in any
tools which may already be used to install dependencies---i.e. malicious
dependencies may be specified here, just as they may be specified in
``requirements.txt`` files.

How to Teach This
=================

The use of environment markers is well established and communicated chiefly
in :ref:`packaging:dependency-specifiers`.
The new environment marker can be introduced in the same document.
Additionally, both for package authors and users, free-threading specific
guidance can be provided at the `Python free-threading guide`_.
The new ``sys.abi_features`` attribute will be documented in the Python
standard library documentation.


Reference Implementation
========================

The reference implementation for the ``sys.abi_features`` attribute can be
found in `Add abi_features to sys <https://github.com/zklaus/cpython/pull/1>`_.

The reference implementation for the environment markers is available in a fork
of the `packaging` library at `Environment markers for ABI features
<https://github.com/zklaus/packaging/pull/1>`_.

`A demonstration package <https://github.com/zklaus/env-marker-example>`_ is
also available.

Since `pip` uses a vendored copy of `packaging` internally, we also provide
`a patched version of pip
<https://github.com/zklaus/pip/tree/env-marker-free-threading>`_, which is
based on pypa/pip:main with the vendored `packaging` replaced by the reference
implementation linked above.

Rejected Ideas
==============

Extension mechanism
-------------------

In an early discussion of the topic (`Environment marker for free-threading`_),
the idea of a general extension mechanism for environment markers was brought
up. While it is appealing to forego a whole PEP process should the need for
new environment markers arise in the future, there are two main challenges.
First, a completely dynamic mechanism would present difficulties for tools that
rely on static analysis of dependency specifications.

This means that even if a dynamic mechanism were to be adopted, new environment
markers would likely still need to be spelled out in a PEP.

Second, the introduction of a dynamic mechanism would require a more complex
implementation in the packaging library, which would be a significant departure
from the current approach.

Having said that, the new ``sys.abi_features`` attribute provides a natural
extension point for any new ABI features, even if specific to a subset of
interpreters, should the need arise to add such new features with a subsequent
PEP.

Open Issues
===========

Other environment markers
-------------------------
If other environment markers are needed right now, this PEP could be extended
to include them.

Other tooling
-------------
The reference implementation is based on the `packaging` library and `pip`.
We have confirmed that this allows for building and installing packages with
several build backends.
It is possible that other tools should be added to the reference
implementation.


Footnotes
=========

.. [#python-free-threading] Python experimental support for free threading
   is available in Python 3.13 and later. For more information, see `Python
   experimental support for free threading`_.

.. [#bitness] While there are some related environment markers available, such
   as ``platform_machine`` and ``platform_python_implementation``, these are
   not sufficient to reliably determine the bitness of the interpreter,
   particularly on platforms that allow the execution of either kind of binary.

.. [#sys-abi-features] This is contingent on the availability of the
   ``sys.abi_features`` attribute in the Python standard library. In
   versions that don't provide this attribute, the marker will be constructed
   from other available information, such as the ``sys.abiflags`` string.


.. _Python experimental support for free threading: https://docs.python.org/3/howto/free-threading-python.html
.. _Python free-threading guide: https://py-free-threading.github.io/
.. _Environment marker for free-threading: https://discuss.python.org/t/environment-marker-for-free-threading/60007
.. _Compatibility Status Tracking: https://py-free-threading.github.io/tracking/
.. _Free-Treaded Wheels: https://hugovk.github.io/free-threaded-wheels/

Acknowledgements
================

Thanks to Filipe Laíns for the suggestion of the ``abi_features`` attribute
and to Stephen Rosen for the Backwards Compatibility section of :pep:`735`,
which served as a template for the corresponding section in this PEP.

Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
