PEP: 787
Title: Safer subprocess usage using t-strings
Author: Nick Humrich <nick@humrich.us>, Alyssa Coghlan <ncoghlan@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: Pending
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Requires: 750
Created: 13-Apr-2025
Python-Version: 3.14

Abstract
========

:pep:`750` introduced template strings (t-strings) as a generalization of f-strings,
providing a way to safely handle string interpolation in various contexts. This PEP
proposes extending the :mod:`subprocess` and :mod:`shlex` modules to natively support t-strings, enabling
safer and more ergonomic shell command execution with interpolated values, as well as
serving as a reference implementation for the t-string feature to improve API ergonomics.

Motivation
==========

Despite the safety benefits and flexibility that template strings offer in PEP 750,
they lack a concrete consumer implementation in the standard library that demonstrates
their practical application. One of the most compelling use cases for t-strings is safer
shell command execution, as noted in the withdrawn :pep:`501`:

.. code-block:: python

    # Unsafe with f-strings:
    os.system(f"echo {message_from_user}")

    # Also unsafe with f-strings
    subprocess.run(f"echo {message_from_user}", shell=True)

    # Fails with f-strings
    subprocess.run(f"echo {message_from_user}")

    # Safe with t-strings and POSIX-compliant shell quoting:
    subprocess.run(t"echo {message_from_user}", shell=True)

    # Safe on all platforms with t-strings:
    subprocess.run(t"echo {message_from_user}")

    # Safe on all platforms without t-strings:
    subprocess.run(["echo", str(message_from_user)])

Currently, developers must choose between convenience (using f-strings with potential
security risks) and safety (using more verbose, list-based APIs). By adding native t-string
support to the :mod:`subprocess` module, we provide a consumer reference implementation that
demonstrates the value of t-strings while addressing a common security concern.

Rationale
=========

The subprocess module is an ideal candidate for t-string support for several reasons:

* Command injection vulnerabilities in shell commands are a well-known security risk.
* The :mod:`subprocess` module already supports both string and list-based command specifications.
* There's a natural mapping between t-strings and proper shell escaping that provides both convenience and safety.
* It serves as a practical showcase for t-strings that developers can immediately understand and appreciate.

By extending subprocess to handle t-strings natively, we make it easier to write secure code without sacrificing
the convenience that led many developers to use potentially unsafe f-strings.

Specification
=============

This PEP proposes two main additions to the standard library:

#. A new ``sh()`` renderer function in the :mod:`shlex` module for safe shell command construction
#. Adding t-string support to the :mod:`subprocess` module's core functions,
    particularly :class:`subprocess.Popen`, :func:`subprocess.run`, and other related functions
    that accept a command argument


Renderer for shell escaping added to :mod:`shlex`
-------------------------------------------------

As a reference implementation, a renderer for safe POSIX shell escaping will be added to
the :mod:`shlex` module. This renderer would be called ``sh`` and would be equivalent to
calling ``shlex.quote`` on each field value in the template literal.

Thus::

  os.system(shlex.sh(t"cat {myfile}"))

would have the same behavior as::

  os.system("cat " + shlex.quote(myfile)))


The addition of ``shlex.sh`` will NOT change the existing admonishments in the
:mod:`subprocess` documentation that passing ``shell=True`` is best avoided, nor the
reference from the :func:`os.system` documentation to the higher level ``subprocess`` APIs.

The t-string processor implementation would look like::

    from string.templatelib import Template, Interpolation

    def sh(template: Template) -> str:
        parts: list[str] = []
        for item in template:
            if isinstance(item, Interpolation):
                # shlex.sh implementation, so shlex.quote can be used directly
                parts.append(quote(str(item.value)))
            else:
                parts.append(item)

        # shlex.sh implementation, so `join` references shlex.join
        return join(parts)

This allows for explicit escaping of t-strings for shell usage::

    import shlex
    # Safe POSIX-compliant shell command construction
    command = shlex.sh(t"cat {filename}")
    os.system(command)

Changes to subprocess module
----------------------------

With the additional renderer in the shlex module, and the addition of template strings,
the :mod:`subprocess` module can be changed to handle accepting template strings
as an additional input type to ``Popen``, as it already accepts a sequence, or a string,
with different behavior for each. In return, all :class:`subprocess.Popen` higher level
functions such as :func:`subprocess.run` could accept strings in a safe way
(on all systems for ``shell=False`` and on :ref:`POSIX systems <pep-0787-defer-non-posix-shells>` for ``shell=True``).

For example::

  subprocess.run(t"cat {myfile}", shell=True)

would automatically use the ``shlex.sh`` renderer provided in this PEP. Therefore, using
``shlex`` inside a ``subprocess.run`` call like so::

  subprocess.run(shlex.sh(t"cat {myfile}"), shell=True)

would be redundant, as ``run`` would automatically render any template literals
through ``shlex.sh``

When ``subprocess.Popen`` is called without ``shell=True``, t-string support would still
provide subprocess with a more ergonomic syntax. For example::

  subprocess.run(t"cat {myfile} --flag {value}")

would be equivalent to::

  subprocess.run(["cat", myfile, "--flag", value])

or, more accurately::

  subprocess.run(shlex.split(f"cat {shlex.quote(myfile)} --flag {shlex.quote(value)}"))

It would do this by first using the ``shlex.sh`` renderer, as above, then using
``shlex.split`` on the result.

The implementation inside ``subprocess.Popen._execute_child`` would check for t-strings::

    from string.templatelib import Template

    if isinstance(args, Template):
        import shlex
        if shell:
            args = shlex.sh(args)
        else:
            args = shlex.split(shlex.sh(args))

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

This change is fully backwards compatible as it only adds new functionality without altering existing behavior.
The subprocess module will continue to handle strings and lists in the same way it currently does.

Security Implications
=====================

This PEP is explicitly designed to improve security by providing a safer alternative to using
f-strings with shell commands. By automatically applying appropriate escaping based on context
(shell or non-shell), it helps prevent command injection vulnerabilities.

However, it's worth noting that when ``shell=True`` is used, the safety is limited to
POSIX-compliant shells. On Windows systems where cmd.exe or PowerShell may be used as the shell,
the escaping mechanism provided by :func:`shlex.quote` is not sufficient to prevent all forms
of command injection.

How to Teach This
=================

This feature can be taught as a natural extension of t-strings that demonstrates their practical value:

1. Introduce the problem of command injection and why f-strings are dangerous with shell commands
2. Show the traditional solutions (list-based commands, manual escaping)
3. Introduce the ``shlex.sh`` renderer for explicit shell escaping::

       # Unsafe:
       os.system(f"cat {filename}")  # Potential command injection!

       # Safe using shlex.sh:
       os.system(shlex.sh(t"cat {filename}"))  # Explicitly escaping for shell

4. Introduce the subprocess module's native t-string support::

       # Unsafe:
       subprocess.run(f"cat {filename}", shell=True)  # Potential command injection!

       # Safe but verbose:
       subprocess.run(["cat", filename])

       # Safe and readable with t-strings:
       subprocess.run(t"cat {filename}", shell=True)  # Automatically escapes filename
       subprocess.run(t"cat {filename}")  # Automatically converts to list form

The implementation should be added to both the shlex and subprocess module documentation with clear
examples and security advisories.

.. _pep-0787-defer-non-posix-shells:

Deferring escaped rendering support for non-POSIX shells
--------------------------------------------------------

:func:`shlex.quote` works by classifying the regex character set ``[\w@%+=:,./-]`` to be
safe, deeming all other characters to be unsafe, and hence requiring quoting of the string
containing them. The quoting mechanism used is then specific to the way that string quoting
works in POSIX shells, so it cannot be trusted when running a shell that doesn't follow
POSIX shell string quoting rules.

For example, running ``subprocess.run(f"echo {shlex.quote(sys.argv[1])}", shell=True)`` is
safe when using a shell that follows POSIX quoting rules:

.. code-block:: console

    $ cat > run_quoted.py
    import sys, shlex, subprocess
    subprocess.run(f"echo {shlex.quote(sys.argv[1])}", shell=True)
    $ python3 run_quoted.py pwd
    pwd
    $ python3 run_quoted.py '; pwd'
    ; pwd
    $ python3 run_quoted.py "'pwd'"
    'pwd'

but remains unsafe when running a shell from Python invokes ``cmd.exe`` (or Powershell):

.. code-block:: powershell

    S:\> echo import sys, shlex, subprocess > run_quoted.py
    S:\> echo subprocess.run(f"echo {shlex.quote(sys.argv[1])}", shell=True) >> run_quoted.py
    S:\> type run_quoted.py
    import sys, shlex, subprocess
    subprocess.run(f"echo {shlex.quote(sys.argv[1])}", shell=True)
    S:\> python3 run_quoted.py "echo OK"
    'echo OK'
    S:\> python3 run_quoted.py "'& echo Oh no!"
    ''"'"'
    Oh no!'

Resolving this standard library limitation is beyond the scope of this PEP.

Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
