PEP: 776
Title: Emscripten Support
Author: Hood Chatham <roberthoodchatham at gmail.com>
Sponsor: Łukasz Langa <lukasz at python.org>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/84996
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Created: 18-Mar-2025
Python-Version: 3.14
Post-History: `18-Mar-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/84996>`__

Abstract
========

`Emscripten <https://emscripten.org/>`__ is a complete open source compiler
toolchain. It compiles C/C++ code into WebAssembly/JavaScript executables, for
use in JavaScript runtimes, including browsers and Node.js. The Rust language
also maintains an Emscripten target.

This PEP formalizes the addition of Tier 3 for Emscripten support in Python 3.14
which `was approved by the Steering Council on October 25, 2024
<https://github.com/python/steering-council/issues/256>`__. The goal is to allow
Pyodide wheels to be uploaded to PyPI.

Motivation
==========

A web browser is a universal computing platform, available on Windows, macOS,
Linux, and every smartphone.

`The Pyodide project <https://pyodide.org/>`__ has supported Emscripten Python
since 2018. Hundreds of thousands of students have learned Python through
Pyodide via projects like `Capytale
<https://web.archive.org/web/20241211090946/https://cfp.jupytercon.com/2023/talk/TJ9YEV/>`__
and `PyodideU <https://stanford.edu/~cpiech/bio/papers/pyodideU.pdf>`__. Pyodide
is also increasingly being used by Python packages to provide interactive
documentation. This demonstrates both the importance and the maturity of the
Emscripten platform.

Emscripten and WASI are also the only supported platforms that offer any
meaningful sandboxing.

Goals
=====

It is our long term goal to upstream the entire Pyodide runtime into CPython,
but this is out of scope for the present PEP. This PEP only attempts to
establish the foundation for future work.

Runtime Goals
-------------

1. To describe the current state of the CPython Emscripten runtime
2. To describe the current state of the Pyodide runtime
3. To identify minor features to be upstreamed from the Pyodide runtime into the
   CPython Emscripten runtime

The minor features identified here are all features that could be implemented
without a PEP. We discuss more significant runtime features that we would like
to implement but we defer decisions on those features to subsequent PEPs.

Packaging Goals
---------------

1. To describe Pyodide's packaging tooling
2. To describe Pyodide's wheel abi to a similar level of detail as the manylinux
   PEPs
3. For Pyodide wheels to be allowed for upload to PyPI


Emscripten Platform Information
===============================

Background on Emscripten
------------------------

`Emscripten
<https://emscripten.org/docs/introducing_emscripten/about_emscripten.html>`__
consists of a C and C++ compiler and linker based on LLVM__, together with a
runtime based on a mildly patched musl libc.

__ https://llvm.org/

Emscripten is a POSIX-based platform. It uses the `WebAssembly binary format`_,
and the `WebAssembly dynamic linking section`_.

.. _WebAssembly binary format: https://webassembly.github.io/spec/core/binary/index.html
.. _WebAssembly dynamic linking section: https://github.com/WebAssembly/tool-conventions/blob/main/DynamicLinking.md

The ``emcc`` compiler is a wrapper around ``clang``. The ``emcc`` linker is a
wrapper around ``wasm-ld`` (`also part of the LLVM toolchain
<https://lld.llvm.org/WebAssembly.html>`__).

Emscripten support for portable C/C++ code source compatibility with Linux is
fairly comprehensive, with certain expected exceptions to be spelled out.
CPython already supports compilation to Emscripten, and it only requires a very
modest number of modifications to the normal Linux target.

POSIX Compliance
----------------

Emscripten is a POSIX platform. However, there are POSIX APIs that exist but
always fail when called and POSIX APIs that don't exist at all. In particular,
there are problems with networking APIs and blocking I/O, and there is no
support for ``fork()``. See `Emscripten Portability Guidelines
<https://emscripten.org/docs/porting/guidelines/portability_guidelines.html>`__.

Emscripten executables can be linked with threading support, but it comes
with several limitations:

* Enabling threading requires websites to be served with special security headers
  that indicate acceptance of the possibility of Spectre_-style information
  leakage. These headers are a usability hazard for users who are not intimately
  familiar with the web platform.

  .. _Spectre: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spectre_(security_vulnerability)

* If an executable is linked with both threading and a dynamic loader, Emscripten
  prints a warning that using dynamic loading and pthreads together is
  experimental. It may cause performance problems or crashes. These problems may
  require WebAssembly standards work to resolve.

Because of these limitations, Pyodide standardizes a no-pthreads build of
Python. If there is sufficient demand, a pthreads build with no dynamic loader
could be added later.

Emscripten ABI Compatibility
----------------------------

The Emscripten compiler has no ABI stability guarantees between versions. Many
Emscripten updates are ABI compatible by chance, and the Rust Emscripten target
behaves as if the ABI were stable with only `occasional negative consequences
<https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/131467>`__.

There are several linker flags that adjust the Emscripten ABI, so Python
packages built to run with Emscripten must make sure to match the ABI-sensitive
linker flags used to compile the interpreter to avoid load-time or run-time
errors. The Emscripten compiler continuously fixes bugs and adds support for new
web platform features. Thus, there is significant benefit to being able to
update the ABI.

In order to balance the ABI stability needs of package maintainers with the ABI
flexibility to allow the platform to move forward, Pyodide plans to adopt a new
ABI for each feature release of Python.

The Pyodide team also coordinates the ABI flags that Pyodide uses with the
Emscripten ABI that Rust supports in order to ensure that we have support for
the many popular Rust packages. Historically, most of the work for this has
been related to unwinding ABIs. See for instance `this Rust Major Change
Proposal <https://github.com/rust-lang/compiler-team/issues/801>`__.

Development Tools
-----------------

Emscripten development tools are equally well supported on Linux, Windows, and
macOS. The upstream tools include:

* The Emscripten Software Developer Kit (:program:`emsdk`) which can be used to
  install the Emscripten compiler toolchain (:program:`emcc`).
* :program:`emcc` is a C and C++ compiler, linker, and a sysroot with headers
  for the system libraries. The system libraries themselves are generated on
  the fly based on the ABI requested.
* Node.js can be used as an "emulator" to run Emscripten programs from the
  command line. This emulation behaves best on Linux with macOS as a runner up.
  Node.js is the most convenient way to test Emscripten programs.
* It is possible to run Emscripten programs inside of any web browser. Browser
  automation tools like Selenium, Playwright, or Puppeteer can be used to test
  features that are browser-only.

Pyodide's tools:

* ``pyodide build`` can be used to cross compile Python packages to run on
  Emscripten. Cross compilation works best on Linux, there is experimental
  support on macOS, and it is entirely unsupported on Windows.
* ``pyodide venv`` can make a virtual environment that runs in Pyodide.
* ``pytest-pyodide`` can test Python code against various JavaScript runtimes.

cibuildwheel__ supports building wheels to target Emscripten using ``pyodide build``.

__ https://cibuildwheel.pypa.io/

In the short term, Pyodide's packaging tooling will stay in the Pyodide
repository. It is an open question where Pyodide's packaging tooling should live
in the long term. Two sensible options would be for it to remain under the
``pyodide`` organization or be moved into the ``pypa`` organization on GitHub.


Emscripten Application Lifecycle
--------------------------------

An Emscripten "binary" consists of a pair of files, an ``.mjs`` file and a
``.wasm`` file. The ``.wasm`` file contains all of the compiled C/C++/Rust code.
The ``.mjs`` file contains the lifecycle code to set up the runtime, locate the
``.wasm`` file, compile it, instantiate it, call the ``main()`` function, and to
shut down the runtime on exit. It also includes an implementation for all of the
system calls, including the file system, the dynamic loader, and any logic to
expose additional functionality from the JavaScript runtime to C code.

The ``.mjs`` file exports a single ``bootstrapEmscriptenExecutable()``
JavaScript function that bootstraps the runtime, calls the ``main()`` function,
and returns an API object that can be used to call C functions. Each time it is
called produces a complete and independent copy of the runtime with its own
separate address space.

The ``bootstrapEmscriptenExecutable()`` takes a large number of runtime
settings. `The full list is described in the Emscripten documentation here.
<https://emscripten.org/docs/api_reference/module.html#id3>`__ The most
important of these are as follows:

* ``thisProgram``: The value of ``argv[0]``. In Python, this makes its way into
  ``sys.executable``.
* ``arguments``: The list of string arguments to be passed to ``main()``.
* ``preRun``: A list of callbacks which are invoked after the JavaScript runtime
  and file system have been bootstrapped but before calling ``main()``. Useful
  to set up the file system, environment variables, and standard streams.
* ``print`` / ``printErr`` : Initial handlers for stdout and stderr. They are
  line buffered and performing a ``flush()`` of a partial line forces an extra
  new line. If tty-like behavior is desired, the standard stream devices should
  be replaced in a ``preRun()`` hook.
* ``onExit``: A handler that is called when the runtime exits.
* ``instantiateWasm``: A callback that is called to instantiate the WebAssembly
  module. Overriding the WebAssembly instantiation procedure via this function
  is useful when you have other custom asynchronous startup actions or downloads
  that can be performed in parallel to WebAssembly compilation. Implementing
  this callback allows performing all of these in parallel.

File System Setup
-----------------

The Standard Library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~


In order for Python to run, it needs access to the standard library in the
Emscripten file system. There are several possible approaches to this:

* The Emscripten linker has a ``--preload-file`` flag that will automatically
  handle loading files. `Information about how it works is available here.
  <https://emscripten.org/docs/porting/files/packaging_files.html#packaging-using-emcc>`__
  This is the simplest approach, but Pyodide has moved away from it because it
  embeds the files into a custom archive format that cannot be processed with
  standard tooling.

* For Node.js, use the NODEFS to mount a native directory with the files into the
  Emscripten file system. This is the most efficient option but is Node only. It
  is closely analogous to what WASI_ does.

  .. _WASI: https://wasi.dev/

* Put the standard library into a zip archive and use ``ZipImporter``. Using an
  uncompressed zip file allows the web server and client to apply better
  compression to the standard library itself. It also uses the more efficient
  native decompression algorithms of the browser rather than less efficient
  WebAssembly decompression. The disadvantages of this are a higher memory
  footprint and breaking :py:mod:`inspect` & various tests that do not expect the
  standard library to be packaged in this way.

* Put the standard library into an uncompressed tar archive and mount it into a
  TARFS read only file system backed by the tar file. This has the best memory
  usage, runtime performance, and transfer size of the options that can be used
  in the browser. The disadvantage is that Emscripten does not itself include a
  TARFS so it requires a downstream implementation.

Pyodide uses the ``ZipImporter`` approach in every runtime. Python uses the
NODEFS approach when run with node and the ``ZipImporter`` approach for the web
example. We will continue with this approach.

The ``ZipImporter`` provides a clean resolution for a bootstrapping problem: the
Python runtime is capable of unpacking a wide variety of archive formats, but
the Python runtime is not ready to use until the standard library is already
available. Since ``zipimport.py`` is a frozen module, it avoids these problems.
All of the other approaches solve the bootstrapping problem by setting up the
standard library using JavaScript.

Third-party packages
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is also necessary to make any needed packages available in the Emscripten
file system. Currently Emscripten CPython has no support for packages. Pyodide
uses two different approaches for packages:

* In the browser, Pyodide downloads and unpacks wheels into the MEMFS
  site-packages directory. It then preloads all dynamic libraries in the wheel.
  The work of downloading and installing all the packages is redone every time
  the runtime starts.

* The Pyodide ``python`` CLI entrypoint mounts all of the host file system as
  NODEFS directories before it bootstraps Python. This allows the normal virtual
  environment mechanism to work. Pyodide virtual environments contain a patched
  copy of pip and a custom ``pip.conf`` so that pip will install Pyodide wheels.
  On startup the Pyodide ``python`` CLI will preload all Emscripten dynamic
  libraries that are in the site-packages directory.


Console and Interactive Usage
-----------------------------

``stdin`` defaults to always returning ``EOF``, while ``stdout`` and ``stderr``
default to calling ``console.log`` and ``console.error`` respectively. It is
possible to pass handlers to ``bootstrapEmscriptenExecutable()`` to configure
the standard streams, but no matter what the I/O devices have undesirable line
buffering behavior that forces a new line when flushed. To implement a well
behaved TTY in-browser, it is necessary to remove the default I/O devices and
replace them in a ``preRun`` hook.

Making ``stdin`` work correctly in the browser poses an additional challenge
because it is not allowed to block for user input in the main thread of the
browser. If Emscripten is run in a web worker and served with the shared memory
headers, it is possible to receive input using shared memory and atomics. It is
also possible for a ``stdin`` device to block in a simpler and more efficient
manner using stack switching using the experimental JavaScript Promise
Integration API.

Pyodide replaces the standard I/O devices in order to fix the line buffering
behavior. When Pyodide is run in Node.js, ``stdin``, ``stdout``, and ``stderr`` are
by default connected to ``process.stdin``, ``process.stdout``, and
``process.stderr`` and so the standard streams work as a tty out of the box.
Pyodide also ensures that ``shutil.get_terminal_size`` returns results
consistent with ``process.stdout.rows`` and ``process.stdout.columns``. Pyodide
currently has no support for stack switching ``stdin``.

Currently, the Emscripten Python Node.js runner uses the default I/O that
Emscripten provides. The web example uses ``Atomics`` for ``stdin`` and has
custom ``stdout`` and ``stderr`` handlers, but they exhibit the undesirable line
buffering behavior. We will upstream the standard streams behaviors from
Pyodide.

In the long term, we hope to implement stack switching ``stdin`` devices, but
that is out of scope for this PEP.


Dynamic Libraries
-----------------

Main Thread Synchronous Loading Limit
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the main browser thread, a dynamic library can only be loaded synchronously
if it is at most 4 kilobytes. This excludes most nontrivial dynamic libraries.
This limit is not present in Node.js and can be avoided by using a web worker. If
stack switching is available, then it is possible to make ``dlopen()`` stack
switch in order to instantiate a dynamic library synchronously.

To avoid the synchronous loading limit, Pyodide currently preloads all dynamic
libraries present in a wheel when installing the wheel (or on startup). This is
a significant disadvantage with packages like SciPy that include a very large
number of shared libraries that are expected to be only loaded on demand.
Pyodide will implement a solution based on stack switching as it becomes more
widely available in runtimes.

Emscripten Python only loads extension module dynamic libraries when they are
imported. This approach is simpler and more efficient when it works. The web
example runs in a web worker and the cli runner runs in Node so neither of these
have the synchronous loading limit. We will continue with this approach in
Emscripten Python.

In the long run, we hope to implement a stack switching ``dlopen``, but that is
out of scope for this PEP.

Missing RPATH Support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Another important limitation of the Emscripten dynamic loader is that it does
not currently have RPATH support. Pyodide's present workaround is as follows:
``auditwheel-emscripten`` places shared library dependencies that are vendored
into a package in a ``${package}.libs`` folder, following auditwheel's
convention. Pyodide patches the dynamic loader to treat this ``${package}.libs``
folder as if it were on the RPATH of all of the dynamic libraries in the wheel.

In Emscripten 4.0.5, we have updated the shared object file format, ``wasm-ld``
and ``emcc`` to accept an ``-rpath`` flag. We are still working on updating the
dynamic loader to respect the rpath, but we expect this will be finished in the
next Emscripten release. Pyodide will then switch to using the RPATH and drop
the patch on the dynamic loader.

Emscripten Python currently uses the unpatched dynamic loader and so cannot load
extension modules that depend on vendored dynamic libraries via DT_NEEDED.
Extension modules can load dynamic libraries via DT_NEEDED if they are in the
system ``lib`` directory. We will wait to resolve this until we have fixed the
Emscripten dynamic loader upstream. When Emscripten Python is built with a
compatible version of Emscripten, it will automatically pick up support for
wheels with vendored dynamic libraries.


Traps and Uncaught Exceptions
-----------------------------

We consider the C runtime state to be corrupted if there is a WebAssembly trap,
an unhandled JavaScript exception, or an uncaught WebAssembly throw instruction.

Unlike in other platforms, there is no operating system to shut down the
executable when there is a trap or other unrecoverable corruption of the libc
runtime. We need to provide our own code to print tracebacks, dump the memory,
or do whatever else is helpful for debugging a crash. If we expose a JavaScript
API, we also must ensure that it is disabled after an unrecoverable crash to
prevent downstream users from observing the Python runtime in an inconsistent
state.

In order to detect fatal errors, Pyodide uses the following approach: all
fallable calls from WebAssembly into JavaScript are wrapped with a JavaScript
try/catch block. Any caught JavaScript exceptions are translated into Python
exceptions. This ensures that any recoverable JavaScript error is caught before
it unwinds through any WebAssembly frames. All entrypoints to WebAssembly are
also wrapped with JavaScript try/catch blocks. Any exceptions caught there have
unwound WebAssembly frames and are thus considered to be fatal errors (though
there is a special case to handle :func:`~sys.exit`). This requires foundational
integration with the Python/JavaScript foreign function interface.

When the Pyodide runtime catches a fatal exception, it introspects the error to
determine whether it came from a trap, a logic error in a system call, a
``setjmp()`` without a ``longjmp()``, or a libcxxabi call to ``__cxa_throw()``
(an uncaught C++ exception or Rust panic). We render as informative an error
message as we can. We also call ``_Py_DumpTraceback()`` so we can display a
Python traceback in addition to the JS/WebAssembly traceback. It also disables
the JavaScript API so that further attempts to call into Python result in an
error saying that the runtime has fatally failed.

Normally, WebAssembly symbols are stripped so the WebAssembly frames are not
very useful. Compiling and linking with ``-g2`` (or a higher debug setting)
ensures that WebAssembly symbols are included and they will appear in the
traceback.

Because Emscripten Python currently has no JavaScript API and no foreign function
interface, the situation is much simpler. The Python Node.js runner wraps the call
to ``bootstrapEmscriptenExecutable()`` in a try/catch block. If an exception is
caught, it displays the JavaScript exception and calls ``_Py_DumpTraceback()``.
It then exits with code 1. We will stick with this approach until we add either
a JavaScript API or foreign function interface, which is out of scope for this PEP.

Specification
=============

Scope of Work
-------------

Adding Emscripten as a Tier 3 platform only requires adding support for
compiling an Emscripten-compatible build from the unpatched CPython source code.
It does not necessarily require there to be any officially distributed
Emscripten artifacts on python.org, although these could be added in the future.
In the short term, they will continue to be distributed downstream with Pyodide.

Emscripten will be built using the same configure and Makefile system as other
POSIX platforms, and must therefore be built on a POSIX platform. Both Linux and
macOS will be supported.

A Python CLI entrypoint will be provided, which among other things can be used
to execute the test suite.

Linkage
-------

It is only supported to statically link the Python interpreter. We use `EM_JS
<https://emscripten.org/docs/api_reference/emscripten.h.html#c.EM_JS>`__
functions in the interpreter for various purposes. It is possible to dynamically
link object files that include ``EM_JS`` functions, but their behavior deviates
significantly from their behavior in static builds. For this reason, it would
require special work to support. If a use case for dynamically linking the
interpreter in Emscripten emerges, we can evaluate how much effort would be
required to support it.

Standard Library
----------------

Unsupported Modules
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

See https://pyodide.org/en/stable/usage/wasm-constraints.html#removed-modules.

Removed Modules
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The following modules are removed from the standard library to reduce download
size and since they currently wouldn't work in the WebAssembly VM.

- curses
- dbm
- ensurepip
- fcntl
- grp
- idlelib
- msvcrt
- pwd
- resource
- syslog
- termios
- tkinter
- turtle
- turtledemo
- venv
- winreg
- winsound

Included but not Working Modules
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The following modules can be imported, but are not functional:

- multiprocessing
- threading
- sockets

as well as any functionality that requires these.

The following are present but cannot be imported due to a dependency on the
termios package which has been removed:

- pty
- tty


Platform Identification
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``sys.platform`` will return ``"emscripten"``. Although Emscripten attempts to
be compatible with Linux, the differences are significant enough that a distinct
name is justified. This is consistent with the return value from ``os.uname()``.

There is also ``sys._emscripten_info`` which includes the Emscripten version and
the runtime (either ``navigator.userAgent`` in a browser or ``"Node js" +
process.version`` in Node.js).

Signals Support
---------------

WebAssembly does not have native support for signals. Furthermore, on a
non-pthreads build, the address space of the WebAssembly module is not shared,
so it is impossible for any thread capable of seeing an interrupt to write to
the eval breaker while the Python interpreter is running code. To work around
this, there are two possible solutions:

* If Emscripten is run in a web worker and served with the shared memory headers,
  it is possible to use shared memory outside of the WebAssembly address space
  as a signal buffer. A signal handling UI thread can write the desired signal
  into the signal buffer. The interpreter can periodically check the state of
  this signal buffer in the eval breaker code. Checking the signal buffer is
  slow compared to checking the eval breaker in native platforms, so we do only
  do it once every 50 times through the eval breaker. See
  `Python/emscripten_signal.c
  <https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/2bef8ea8ea045d20394f0daec7a5c5b1046a4e22/Python/emscripten_signal.c>`__
* Using stack switching, we can occasionally switch the stack and allow the
  JavaScript event loop to go around, then check the state of a signal buffer.
  This requires the experimental JavaScript Promise Integration API, and would
  be best used with the techniques for optimizing long tasks described `in this
  article <https://web.dev/articles/optimize-long-tasks>`__

Emscripten Python has already implemented the solution based on shared memory,
and it is in use in Pyodide.

Eventually, we hope to implement stack-switching-based signals so that it is
possible to use signals in the main thread of node and the browser, as well as
in in web pages that are not served with the shared memory headers. We will need
to keep the shared memory based approach as well, both for backwards
compatibility and because it is more efficient when it is possible. However,
this is out of scope for this PEP.


Function Pointer Casts
----------------------

`Section 6.3.2.3, paragraph 8
<https://www.open-std.org/JTC1/SC22/WG14/www/docs/n1256.pdf#page=60>`__ of the C
standard reads:

    A pointer to a function of one type may be converted to a pointer to a
    function of another type and back again; the result shall compare equal to
    the original pointer. If a converted pointer is used to call a function
    whose type is not compatible with the pointed-to type, the behavior is
    undefined.

However, most platforms have the same behavior: if a function is called with too
many arguments, the extra arguments are ignored; if a function is called with
too few arguments, the extra arguments are filled in with garbage.

On the other hand, the WebAssembly spec defines calling a function with the
wrong signature to trap (`see step 18 in the execution of call_indirect
<https://webassembly.github.io/spec/core/exec/instructions.html#xref-syntax-instructions-syntax-instr-control-mathsf-call-indirect-x-y)>`__.

It is common for Python extension modules to cast a function to a different
signature and call it with the different signature. For instance, many C
extensions define a ``METH_NOARGS`` function to take 0 or 1 argument. The
interpreter calls it with two arguments, the first of which is the Python module
object and the second of which is always ``NULL``. In order to make these
extension modules work without changing their source code, we need special
handling.

Initially, we resolved this problem by calling out to JavaScript and having
JavaScript call the function pointer. When calling a WebAssembly function from
JavaScript, missing arguments are treated as zero and extra arguments are
ignored (`see step 7 here
<https://webassembly.github.io/spec/js-api/index.html#call-an-exported-function)>`__.
This works, but has the disadvantage of being slow and breaking stack switching
-- it is not possible to stack switch through JavaScript frames.

Using the wasm-gc `ref.test
<https://webassembly.github.io/gc/core/exec/instructions.html#xref-syntax-instructions-syntax-instr-ref-mathsf-ref-test-mathit-rt>`__
instruction, we can query the type of the function pointer and manually fix up
the argument list.

wasm-gc is a relatively new feature for WebAssembly runtimes, so we attempt to
use a wasm-gc based function pointer cast trampoline if possible and fall back
to a JS trampoline if not. Every JavaScript runtime that supports stack
switching also supports wasm-gc, so this ensures that stack switching works on
every platform runtime that supports it. The one wrinkle is that iOS 18 ships a
broken implementation of wasm-gc so we have to special case it.

`See here for the full implementation details.
<https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/98fa4a49fecbac3c990a25ce5d300592dad31be0/Python/emscripten_trampoline.c>`__

The function pointer cast handling is fully implemented in cpython. Pyodide uses
exactly the same code as upstream.


CI Resources
------------

Pyodide can be built and tested on any Linux with a reasonably recent version of
Node.js. Anaconda has offered to provide physical hardware to run Emscripten
buildbots, maintained by Russell Keith-Magee.

CPython does not currently test Tier 3 platforms on GitHub Actions, but if this
ever changes, their Linux runners are able to build and test Emscripten Python.

Packaging
---------

Existing Package Support
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Pyodide currently maintains ports of 255 different packages at the time of this
writing, including major scientific Python packages like NumPy, SciPy, pandas,
Polars, scikit-learn, OpenCV, PyArrow, and Pillow as well as general purpose
packages like aiohttp, Requests, Pydantic, cryptography, and orjson.

About 60 packages are also testing against Pyodide in their CI, including NumPy,
pandas, awkward-cpp, scikit-image, statsmodels, PyArrow, Hypothesis, and PyO3.

Emscripten Wheel Tags
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Emscripten wheels will use as the platform tag either
``emscripten_<version>_wasm32`` or ``pyodide_<abi>_wasm32``. For example:

* ``emscripten_3_1_58_wasm32``
* ``pyodide_2025_0_wasm32``

The first triple is ambiguous, since even with Emscripten 3.1.58 it is possible
to link dynamic libraries that require a large number of distinct ABIs,
depending on linker and compiler options. It is our intent that the
``pyodide_2025_0`` specifies the particular ABI. Thus, the relationship between
``pyodide_<abi>`` and ``emscripten_<version>`` is intended to be the same as the
relationship between ``manylinux<version>`` and ``linux``.

For example, wheels with the following tags are compatible with Python 3.13
Pyodide:

- ``cp13-cp13-emscripten_3_1_58_wasm32``
- ``cp13-cp13-pyodide_2025_0_wasm32``
- ``abi3-cp10-pyodide_2025_0_wasm32``

As well as all non platformed tags. To generate the list of compatible tags, one
can use the following code:

.. code-block:: Python

    from packaging.tags import cpython_tags, _generic_platforms

    def _emscripten_platforms() -> Iterator[str]:
        pyodide_abi_version = sysconfig.get_config_var("PYODIDE_ABI_VERSION")
        if pyodide_abi_version:
            yield f"pyodide_{pyodide_abi_version}_wasm32"
        yield from _generic_platforms()

    emscripten_tags = cpython_tags(platforms=_emscripten_platforms())

`This code will be added to pypa/packaging
<https://github.com/pypa/packaging/pull/804>`__.

Emscripten Wheel ABI
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The specification of the ``pyodide_<abi>`` ABI includes:

* Which version of the Emscripten compiler is used
* What libraries are statically linked with the interpreter
* What stack unwinding ABI is to be used
* Which runtime platform features are required to be present

and a handful of other similar details that affect the ABI.

The ABI is selected by choosing the appropriate version of the Emscripten
compiler and passing appropriate compiler and linker flags. It is possible for
other people to build their own Python interpreter that is compatible with the
Pyodide ABI, it is not necessary to use the Pyodide distribution itself.

The ``pyodide build`` tool knows how to create wheels that match our ABI. As an
alternative,
`the auditwheel-emscripten tool <https://github.com/ryanking13/auditwheel-emscripten>`__
is capable of performing basic compatibility checks, vendoring shared libraries,
and retagging the wheel from ``emscripten_<version>`` to ``pyodide_<abi>``. Unlike
with manylinux, there is no need for a Docker container to build the
``pyodide_<abi>`` wheels. All that is needed is a Linux machine and appropriate
versions of Python, Node.js, and Emscripten.

Dependency Specifier Markers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To check for the Emscripten platform in a dependency specifier, one can use
``sys_platform == 'emscripten'`` (or its negation). Such checks are already in use
in the wild and seem to be sufficient for the needs of the community.

Trove Classifier
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Packages that build and test Emscripten wheels can declare this by adding the
``Environment :: WebAssembly :: Emscripten``. PyPI already accepts uploads of
packages with this classifier.


PEP 11
------

:pep:`11` will be updated to indicate that Emscripten is supported, specifically
the triples ``wasm32-unknown-emscripten_xx_xx_xx``.

Russell Keith-Magee will serve as the initial core team contact for these ABIs.


Future Work
===========

Improving Cross Builds in the Packaging Ecosystem
-------------------------------------------------

Python now supports four non-self-hosting platforms: iOS, Android, WASI, and
Emscripten. All of them will need to build packages via cross builds. Currently,
``pyodide-build`` allows building a very large number of Python packages for
Emscripten, but it is very complicated. Ideally, the Python packaging ecosystem
would have standards for cross builds. This is a difficult long term project,
particularly because the packaging system is complex and was designed from the
ground up with the assumption that cross compilation would not happen.


Pyodide Runtime Features to be Upstreamed
-----------------------------------------

This is a collection of Pyodide runtime features that are out of scope for this
PEP and for the Python 3.14 development cycle but we would like to upstream in
the future.

JavaScript API for Bootstrapping
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Currently we offer no stable API for bootstrapping Python. Instead, we use `one
collection of settings for the Node.js CLI entrypoint
<https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/98fa4a49fecbac3c990a25ce5d300592dad31be0/Tools/wasm/emscripten/node_entry.mjs#L33-L46>`__
and `a separate collection of settings for the browser demo
<https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/98fa4a49fecbac3c990a25ce5d300592dad31be0/Tools/wasm/emscripten/web_example/python.worker.mjs#L64-L88>`__.

The Emscripten executable startup API is complicated and there are many possible
configurations that are broken. Pyodide offers a simpler set of options than
Emscripten. This gives downstream users a lot of flexibility while allowing us
to maintain a small number of tested configurations. It also reduces downstream
code duplication.

Eventually, we would like to upstream Pyodide's bootstrapping API. In the short
term, to keep things simple we will support no JavaScript API.

JavaScript foreign function interface (FFI)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Because Emscripten supports POSIX, a significant number of tasks can be achieved
using the ``os`` module. However, many fundamental operations in JavaScript
runtimes are not possible via POSIX APIs. Pyodide's approach is to specify a
mapping between the JavaScript object model and the Python object model and a
calling convention that allows high level bidirectional integration.

Asyncio
~~~~~~~

Most JavaScript primitives are asynchronous. The JavaScript thread that Python
runs in already has an event loop. It it not too difficult to implement a Python
event loop that defers all actual work to the JavaScript event loop,
`implemented in Pyodide here <https://github.com/pyodide/pyodide/blob/b3721fd5e9c7981216c4604025e2617e53f9726a/src/py/pyodide/webloop.py>`__.

This is logically dependent on having at least some limited JavaScript FFI
because the only way to schedule tasks on the JavaScript event loop is via a
call out to JavaScript.

One cause of incompatibility is that it is not possible to control the life
cycle of the event loop from within a JavaScript isolate. This makes
``asyncio.run()`` and similar things not work.

Using stack switching it is also possible to make a coroutine out of
"synchronous" Python frames. These stack switching coroutines are scheduled on
the same event loop as ordinary Python coroutines and are fully reentrant. This
is fully implemented in Pyodide.


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Adding a new platform does not introduce any backwards compatibility concerns to
CPython itself. However, there may be some backwards compatibility implications
on Pyodide users. There are a large number of existing users of Pyodide, so it
is important when upstreaming features from Pyodide into Python that we take
care to minimize backwards incompatibility. We will also need a way to disable
partially-upstreamed features so that Pyodide can replace them with more
complete versions downstream.

These backwards compatibility concerns impact not just the runtime but also the
packaging system. Adding new platform tags should not affect existing packaging
tools because tools ignore wheels with an unknown package tag.


Security Implications
=====================

Adding a new platform does not add any new security implications.

Emscripten and WASI are also the only supported platforms that offer sandboxing.
If users wish to execute untrusted Python code or untrusted Python extension
modules, Emscripten provides a secure way for them to do that.

How to Teach This
=================

The education needs related to this PEP relate to two groups of developers.

First, web developers will need to know how to build Python and use it in a
website, along with their own Python code and any supporting packages, and how
to use them all at runtime. The documentation will cover this in a similar form
to the existing Windows embeddable package. In the short term, we will encourage
developers to use Pyodide if at all possible.

Second, maintainers of packages with binary components need to know how to
build, test, label, and deploy them for Emscripten (see Packaging). The Pyodide
documentation on `building and testing packages
<https://pyodide.org/en/stable/development/building-and-testing-packages.html>`__
is the best reference for this.


Reference Implementation
========================

Pyodide.


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the CC0-1.0-Universal
license, whichever is more permissive.
