PEP: 782
Title: Add PyBytesWriter C API
Author: Victor Stinner <vstinner@python.org>
Discussions-To: `31-Mar-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-782-add-pybyteswriter-c-api/86617>`__
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Created: 27-Mar-2025
Python-Version: 3.14
Post-History:
    `18-Feb-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/81182>`__


.. highlight:: c


Abstract
========

Add a new ``PyBytesWriter`` C API to create ``bytes`` objects.

Soft deprecate ``PyBytes_FromStringAndSize(NULL, size)`` and
``_PyBytes_Resize()`` APIs. These APIs treat an immutable ``bytes``
object as a mutable object. They remain available and maintained, don't
emit deprecation warning, but are no longer recommended when writing new
code.


Rationale
=========

Disallow creation of incomplete/inconsistent objects
----------------------------------------------------

Creating a Python :class:`bytes` object using
``PyBytes_FromStringAndSize(NULL, size)`` and ``_PyBytes_Resize()``
treats an immutable :class:`bytes` object as mutable. It goes against
the principle that :class:`bytes` objects are immutable. It also creates
an incomplete or "invalid" object since bytes are not initialized. In
Python, a :class:`bytes` object should always have its bytes fully
initialized.

* `Avoid creating incomplete/invalid objects api-evolution#36
  <https://github.com/capi-workgroup/api-evolution/issues/36>`_
* `Disallow mutating immutable objects api-evolution#20
  <https://github.com/capi-workgroup/api-evolution/issues/20>`_
* `Disallow creation of incomplete/inconsistent objects problems#56
  <https://github.com/capi-workgroup/problems/issues/56>`_

Inefficient allocation strategy
-------------------------------

When creating a bytes string and the output size is unknown, one
strategy is to allocate a short buffer and extend it (to the exact size)
each time a larger write is needed.

This strategy is inefficient because it requires to enlarge the buffer
multiple timess. It's more efficient to overallocate the buffer the
first time that a larger write is needed. It reduces the number of
expensive ``realloc()`` operations which can imply a memory copy.


Specification
=============

API
---

.. c:type:: PyBytesWriter

   A Python :class:`bytes` writer instance created by
   :c:func:`PyBytesWriter_Create`.

   The instance must be destroyed by :c:func:`PyBytesWriter_Finish` or
   :c:func:`PyBytesWriter_Discard`.

Create, Finish, Discard
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. c:function:: PyBytesWriter* PyBytesWriter_Create(Py_ssize_t size)

   Create a :c:type:`PyBytesWriter` to write *size* bytes.

   If *size* is greater than zero, allocate *size* bytes for the
   returned buffer.

   On error, set an exception and return NULL.

   *size* must be positive or zero.

.. c:function:: PyObject* PyBytesWriter_Finish(PyBytesWriter *writer)

   Finish a :c:type:`PyBytesWriter` created by
   :c:func:`PyBytesWriter_Create`.

   On success, return a Python :class:`bytes` object.
   On error, set an exception and return ``NULL``.

   The writer instance is invalid after the call in any case.

.. c:function:: PyObject* PyBytesWriter_FinishWithSize(PyBytesWriter *writer, Py_ssize_t size)

   Similar to :c:func:`PyBytesWriter_Finish`, but resize the writer
   to *size* bytes before creating the :class:`bytes` object.

.. c:function:: PyObject* PyBytesWriter_FinishWithPointer(PyBytesWriter *writer, void *buf)

   Similar to :c:func:`PyBytesWriter_Finish`, but resize the writer
   using *buf* pointer before creating the :class:`bytes` object.

   Pseudo-code::

       Py_ssize_t size = (char*)buf - (char*)PyBytesWriter_GetData(writer);
       return PyBytesWriter_FinishWithSize(writer, size);

   Set an exception and return ``NULL`` if *buf* pointer is outside the
   internal buffer bounds.

.. c:function:: void PyBytesWriter_Discard(PyBytesWriter *writer)

   Discard a :c:type:`PyBytesWriter` created by :c:func:`PyBytesWriter_Create`.

   Do nothing if *writer* is ``NULL``.

   The writer instance is invalid after the call.

High-level API
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. c:function:: int PyBytesWriter_WriteBytes(PyBytesWriter *writer, const void *bytes, Py_ssize_t size)

   Write *size* bytes of *bytes* into the *writer*.

   If *size* is equal to ``-1``, call ``strlen(bytes)`` to get the
   string length.

   On success, return ``0``.
   On error, set an exception and return ``-1``.

.. c:function:: int PyBytesWriter_Format(PyBytesWriter *writer, const char *format, ...)

   Similar to ``PyBytes_FromFormat()``, but write the output directly
   into the writer.

   On success, return ``0``.
   On error, set an exception and return ``-1``.

Getters
^^^^^^^

.. c:function:: Py_ssize_t PyBytesWriter_GetSize(PyBytesWriter *writer)

   Get the writer size.

.. c:function:: void* PyBytesWriter_GetData(PyBytesWriter *writer)

   Get the writer data.

   The pointer is valid until :c:func:`PyBytesWriter_Finish` or
   :c:func:`PyBytesWriter_Discard` is called on *writer*.

Low-level API
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. c:function:: int PyBytesWriter_Resize(PyBytesWriter *writer, Py_ssize_t size)

   Resize the writer to *size* bytes. It can be used to enlarge or to
   shrink the writer.

   Newly allocated bytes are left uninitialized.

   On success, return ``0``.
   On error, set an exception and return ``-1``.

   *size* must be positive or zero.

.. c:function:: int PyBytesWriter_Grow(PyBytesWriter *writer, Py_ssize_t grow)

   Resize the writer by adding *grow* bytes to the current writer size.

   Newly allocated bytes are left uninitialized.

   On success, return ``0``.
   On error, set an exception and return ``-1``.

   *size* must be positive or zero.

.. c:function:: void* PyBytesWriter_GrowAndUpdatePointer(PyBytesWriter *writer, Py_ssize_t size, void *buf)

   Similar to :c:func:`PyBytesWriter_Grow`, but update also the *buf*
   pointer.

   On error, set an exception and return ``NULL``.

   Pseudo-code::

       Py_ssize_t pos = (char*)buf - (char*)PyBytesWriter_GetData(writer);
       if (PyBytesWriter_Grow(writer, size) < 0) {
           return NULL;
       }
       return (char*)PyBytesWriter_GetData(writer) + pos;


Overallocation
--------------

:c:func:`PyBytesWriter_Resize` and :c:func:`PyBytesWriter_Grow`
overallocate the internal buffer to reduce the number of ``realloc()``
calls and so reduce memory copies.


Thread safety
-------------

The API is not thread safe: a writer should only be used by a single
thread at the same time.


Soft deprecations
-----------------

Soft deprecate ``PyBytes_FromStringAndSize(NULL, size)`` and
``_PyBytes_Resize()`` APIs. These APIs treat an immutable ``bytes``
object as a mutable object. They remain available and maintained, don't
emit deprecation warning, but are no longer recommended when writing new
code.

``PyBytes_FromStringAndSize(str, size)`` is not soft deprecated. Only
calls with ``NULL`` *str* are soft deprecated.


Examples
========

High-level API
--------------

Create the bytes string ``b"Hello World!"``::

    PyObject* hello_world(void)
    {
        PyBytesWriter *writer = PyBytesWriter_Create(0);
        if (writer == NULL) {
            goto error;
        }
        if (PyBytesWriter_WriteBytes(writer, "Hello", -1) < 0) {
            goto error;
        }
        if (PyBytesWriter_Format(writer, " %s!", "World") < 0) {
            goto error;
        }
        return PyBytesWriter_Finish(writer);

    error:
        PyBytesWriter_Discard(writer);
        return NULL;
    }


Create the bytes string "abc"
-----------------------------

Example creating the bytes string ``b"abc"``, with a fixed size of 3 bytes::

    PyObject* create_abc(void)
    {
        PyBytesWriter *writer = PyBytesWriter_Create(3);
        if (writer == NULL) {
            return NULL;
        }

        char *str = PyBytesWriter_GetData(writer);
        memcpy(str, "abc", 3);
        return PyBytesWriter_Finish(writer);
    }

GrowAndUpdatePointer() example
------------------------------

Example using a pointer to write bytes and to track the written size.

Create the bytes string ``b"Hello World"``::

    PyObject* grow_example(void)
    {
        // Allocate 10 bytes
        PyBytesWriter *writer = PyBytesWriter_Create(10);
        if (writer == NULL) {
            return NULL;
        }

        // Write some bytes
        char *buf = PyBytesWriter_GetData(writer);
        memcpy(buf, "Hello ", strlen("Hello "));
        buf += strlen("Hello ");

        // Allocate 10 more bytes
        buf = PyBytesWriter_GrowAndUpdatePointer(writer, 10, buf);
        if (buf == NULL) {
            PyBytesWriter_Discard(writer);
            return NULL;
        }

        // Write more bytes
        memcpy(buf, "World", strlen("World"));
        buf += strlen("World");

        // Truncate the string at 'buf' position
        // and create a bytes object
        return PyBytesWriter_FinishWithPointer(writer, buf);
    }


Reference Implementation
========================

`Pull request gh-131681 <https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/131681>`__.

The implementation allocates internally a :class:`bytes` object, so
:c:func:`PyBytesWriter_Finish` just returns the object without having
to copy memory.

For strings up to 256 bytes, a small internal raw buffer of bytes is
used. It avoids having to resize a :class:`bytes` object which is
inefficient. At the end, :c:func:`PyBytesWriter_Finish` creates the
:class:`bytes` object from this small buffer.

A free list is used to reduce the cost of allocating a
:c:type:`PyBytesWriter` on the heap memory.


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

There is no impact on the backward compatibility, only new APIs are
added.


Prior Discussions
=================

* March 2025: Third public API attempt, using size rather than pointers:

  * `Discussion <https://discuss.python.org/t/81182/56>`_
  * `Pull request gh-131681 <https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/131681>`__

* February 2025: Second public API attempt:

  * `Issue gh-129813 <https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/129813>`_
    and
    `pull request gh-129814
    <https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/129814>`_

* July 2024: First public API attempt:

  * C API Working Group decision:
    `Add PyBytes_Writer() API
    <https://github.com/capi-workgroup/decisions/issues/39>`_
    (August 2024)
  * `Pull request gh-121726
    <https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/121726>`_:
    first public API attempt (July 2024)

* March 2016:
  `Fast _PyAccu, _PyUnicodeWriter and _PyBytesWriter APIs to produce
  strings in CPython <https://vstinner.github.io/pybyteswriter.html>`_:
  Article on the original private ``_PyBytesWriter`` C API.


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
