PEP: 241
Title: Metadata for Python Software Packages
Author: A.M. Kuchling <amk@amk.ca>
Discussions-To: distutils-sig@python.org
Status: Superseded
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Created: 12-Mar-2001
Post-History: `19-Mar-2001 <https://mail.python.org/archives/list/distutils-sig@python.org/thread/46XPDHQHI3XAAJHEZAMAMKZYAI6K7NB6/>`__
Superseded-By: 314

.. superseded:: 314

Introduction
============

This PEP describes a mechanism for adding metadata to Python
packages.  It includes specifics of the field names, and their
semantics and usage.


Including Metadata in Packages
==============================

The Distutils 'sdist' command will be modified to extract the
metadata fields from the arguments and write them to a file in the
generated zipfile or tarball.  This file will be named PKG-INFO
and will be placed in the top directory of the source
distribution (where the README, INSTALL, and other files usually
go).

Developers may not provide their own PKG-INFO file.  The "sdist"
command will, if it detects an existing PKG-INFO file, terminate
with an appropriate error message.  This should prevent confusion
caused by the PKG-INFO and setup.py files being out of sync.

The PKG-INFO file format is a single set of :rfc:`822` headers
parseable by the rfc822.py module.  The field names listed in the
following section are used as the header names.  There's no
extension mechanism in this simple format; the Catalog and Distutils
SIGs will aim at getting a more flexible format ready for Python 2.2.


Fields
======

This section specifies the names and semantics of each of the
supported metadata fields.

Fields marked with "(Multiple use)" may be specified multiple
times in a single PKG-INFO file.  Other fields may only occur
once in a PKG-INFO file.  Fields marked with "(optional)" are
not required to appear in a valid PKG-INFO file, all other
fields must be present.

Metadata-Version
----------------

Version of the file format; currently "1.0" is the only
legal value here.

Example::

    Metadata-Version: 1.0

Name
----

The name of the package.

Example::

    Name: BeagleVote

Version
-------

A string containing the package's version number.  This
field should be parseable by one of the Version classes
(StrictVersion or LooseVersion) in the distutils.version
module.

Example::

    Version: 1.0a2

Platform (multiple use)
-----------------------

A comma-separated list of platform specifications, summarizing
the operating systems supported by the package.  The major
supported platforms are listed below, but this list is
necessarily incomplete.

::

    POSIX, MacOS, Windows, BeOS, Palm OS.

Binary distributions will use the Supported-Platform field in
their metadata to specify the OS and CPU for which the binary
package was compiled.  The semantics of the Supported-Platform
are not specified in this PEP.

Example::

    Platform: POSIX, Windows

Summary
-------

A one-line summary of what the package does.

Example::

    Summary: A module for collecting votes from beagles.

Description (optional)
----------------------

A longer description of the package that can run to several
paragraphs.  (Software that deals with metadata should not
assume any maximum size for this field, though one hopes that
people won't include their instruction manual as the
long-description.)

Example::

    Description: This module collects votes from beagles
                 in order to determine their electoral wishes.
                 Do NOT try to use this module with basset hounds;
                 it makes them grumpy.

Keywords (optional)
-------------------

A list of additional keywords to be used to assist searching
for the package in a larger catalog.

Example::

    Keywords: dog puppy voting election

Home-page (optional)
--------------------

A string containing the URL for the package's home page.

Example::

    Home-page: http://www.example.com/~cschultz/bvote/

Author (optional)
-----------------

A string containing at a minimum the author's name.  Contact
information can also be added, separating each line with
newlines.

Example::

    Author: C. Schultz
            Universal Features Syndicate
            Los Angeles, CA

Author-email
------------

A string containing the author's e-mail address.  It can contain
a name and e-mail address in the legal forms for a :rfc:`822`
'From:' header.  It's not optional because cataloging systems
can use the e-mail portion of this field as a unique key
representing the author.  A catalog might provide authors the
ability to store their GPG key, personal home page, and other
additional metadata *about the author*, and optionally the
ability to associate several e-mail addresses with the same
person.  Author-related metadata fields are not covered by this
PEP.

Example::

    Author-email: "C. Schultz" <cschultz@example.com>

License
-------

A string selected from a short list of choices, specifying the
license covering the package.  Some licenses result in the
software being freely redistributable, so packagers and
resellers can automatically know that they're free to
redistribute the software.  Other licenses will require
a careful reading by a human to determine how the software can be
repackaged and resold.

The choices are::

    Artistic, BSD, DFSG, GNU GPL, GNU LGPL, "MIT",
    Mozilla PL, "public domain", Python, Qt PL, Zope PL, unknown,
    nocommercial, nosell, nosource, shareware, other

Definitions of some of the licenses are:

=============  ===================================================
DFSG           The license conforms to the Debian Free Software
               Guidelines, but does not use one of the other
               DFSG conforming licenses listed here.
               More information is available at:
               http://www.debian.org/social_contract#guidelines

Python         Python 1.6 or higher license.  Version 1.5.2 and
               earlier are under the MIT license.

public domain  Software is public domain, not copyrighted.

unknown        Status is not known

nocommercial   Free private use but commercial use not permitted

nosell         Free use but distribution for profit by arrangement

nosource       Freely distributable but no source code

shareware      Payment is requested if software is used

other          General category for other non-DFSG licenses
=============  ===================================================

Some of these licenses can be interpreted to mean the software is
freely redistributable.  The list of redistributable licenses is::

    Artistic, BSD, DFSG, GNU GPL, GNU LGPL, "MIT",
    Mozilla PL, "public domain", Python, Qt PL, Zope PL,
    nosource, shareware

Note that being redistributable does not mean a package
qualifies as free software, 'nosource' and 'shareware' being
examples.

Example::

    License: MIT


Acknowledgements
================

Many changes and rewrites to this document were suggested by the
readers of the Distutils SIG.  In particular, Sean Reifschneider
often contributed actual text for inclusion in this PEP.

The list of licenses was compiled using the SourceForge license
list and the CTAN license list compiled by Graham Williams; Carey
Evans also offered several useful suggestions on this list.


Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.
