PEP: 696
Title: Type Defaults for Type Parameters
Author: James Hilton-Balfe <gobot1234yt@gmail.com>
Sponsor: Jelle Zijlstra <jelle.zijlstra@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-696-type-defaults-for-typevarlikes/22569
Status: Accepted
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Typing
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 14-Jul-2022
Python-Version: 3.13
Post-History: `22-Mar-2022 <https://mail.python.org/archives/list/typing-sig@python.org/thread/7VWBZWXTCX6RAJO6GG67BAXUPFZ24NTC/>`__,
              `08-Jan-2023 <https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-696-type-defaults-for-typevarlikes/22569/>`__,
Resolution: https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-696-type-defaults-for-typevarlikes/22569/34

Abstract
--------

This PEP introduces the concept of type defaults for type parameters,
including ``TypeVar``, ``ParamSpec``, and ``TypeVarTuple``,
which act as defaults for type parameters for which no type is specified.

Default type argument support is available in some popular languages
such as C++, TypeScript, and Rust. A survey of type parameter syntax in
some common languages has been conducted by the author of :pep:`695`
and can be found in its
:pep:`Appendix A <695#appendix-a-survey-of-type-parameter-syntax>`.


Motivation
----------

::

   T = TypeVar("T", default=int)  # This means that if no type is specified T = int

   @dataclass
   class Box(Generic[T]):
       value: T | None = None

   reveal_type(Box())                      # type is Box[int]
   reveal_type(Box(value="Hello World!"))  # type is Box[str]

One place this `regularly comes
up <https://github.com/python/typing/issues/975>`__ is ``Generator``. I
propose changing the *stub definition* to something like::

   YieldT = TypeVar("YieldT")
   SendT = TypeVar("SendT", default=None)
   ReturnT = TypeVar("ReturnT", default=None)

   class Generator(Generic[YieldT, SendT, ReturnT]): ...

   Generator[int] == Generator[int, None] == Generator[int, None, None]

This is also useful for a ``Generic`` that is commonly over one type.

::

   class Bot: ...

   BotT = TypeVar("BotT", bound=Bot, default=Bot)

   class Context(Generic[BotT]):
       bot: BotT

   class MyBot(Bot): ...

   reveal_type(Context().bot)         # type is Bot  # notice this is not Any which is what it would be currently
   reveal_type(Context[MyBot]().bot)  # type is MyBot

Not only does this improve typing for those who explicitly use it, it
also helps non-typing users who rely on auto-complete to speed up their
development.

This design pattern is common in projects like:

- `discord.py <https://github.com/Rapptz/discord.py>`__ — where the
  example above was taken from.
- `NumPy <https://github.com/numpy/numpy>`__ — the default for types
  like ``ndarray``'s ``dtype`` would be ``float64``. Currently it's
  ``Unknown`` or ``Any``.
- `TensorFlow <https://github.com/tensorflow/tensorflow>`__ — this
  could be used for Tensor similarly to ``numpy.ndarray`` and would be
  useful to simplify the definition of ``Layer``.


Specification
-------------

Default Ordering and Subscription Rules
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The order for defaults should follow the standard function parameter
rules, so a type parameter with no ``default`` cannot follow one with
a ``default`` value. Doing so should ideally raise a ``TypeError`` in
``typing._GenericAlias``/``types.GenericAlias``, and a type checker
should flag this as an error.

::

   DefaultStrT = TypeVar("DefaultStrT", default=str)
   DefaultIntT = TypeVar("DefaultIntT", default=int)
   DefaultBoolT = TypeVar("DefaultBoolT", default=bool)
   T = TypeVar("T")
   T2 = TypeVar("T2")

   class NonDefaultFollowsDefault(Generic[DefaultStrT, T]): ...  # Invalid: non-default TypeVars cannot follow ones with defaults


   class NoNonDefaults(Generic[DefaultStrT, DefaultIntT]): ...

   (
       NoNoneDefaults ==
       NoNoneDefaults[str] ==
       NoNoneDefaults[str, int]
   )  # All valid


   class OneDefault(Generic[T, DefaultBoolT]): ...

   OneDefault[float] == OneDefault[float, bool]  # Valid
   reveal_type(OneDefault)          # type is type[OneDefault[T, DefaultBoolT = bool]]
   reveal_type(OneDefault[float]()) # type is OneDefault[float, bool]


   class AllTheDefaults(Generic[T1, T2, DefaultStrT, DefaultIntT, DefaultBoolT]): ...

   reveal_type(AllTheDefaults)                  # type is type[AllTheDefaults[T1, T2, DefaultStrT = str, DefaultIntT = int, DefaultBoolT = bool]]
   reveal_type(AllTheDefaults[int, complex]())  # type is AllTheDefaults[int, complex, str, int, bool]
   AllTheDefaults[int]  # Invalid: expected 2 arguments to AllTheDefaults
   (
       AllTheDefaults[int, complex] ==
       AllTheDefaults[int, complex, str] ==
       AllTheDefaults[int, complex, str, int] ==
       AllTheDefaults[int, complex, str, int, bool]
   )  # All valid

With the new Python 3.12 syntax for generics (introduced by :pep:`695`), this can
be enforced at compile time::

   type Alias[DefaultT = int, T] = tuple[DefaultT, T]  # SyntaxError: non-default TypeVars cannot follow ones with defaults

   def generic_func[DefaultT = int, T](x: DefaultT, y: T) -> None: ...  # SyntaxError: non-default TypeVars cannot follow ones with defaults

   class GenericClass[DefaultT = int, T]: ...  # SyntaxError: non-default TypeVars cannot follow ones with defaults

``ParamSpec`` Defaults
''''''''''''''''''''''

``ParamSpec`` defaults are defined using the same syntax as
``TypeVar`` \ s but use a ``list`` of types or an ellipsis
literal "``...``" or another in-scope ``ParamSpec`` (see `Scoping Rules`_).

::

   DefaultP = ParamSpec("DefaultP", default=[str, int])

   class Foo(Generic[DefaultP]): ...

   reveal_type(Foo)                  # type is type[Foo[DefaultP = [str, int]]]
   reveal_type(Foo())                # type is Foo[[str, int]]
   reveal_type(Foo[[bool, bool]]())  # type is Foo[[bool, bool]]

``TypeVarTuple`` Defaults
'''''''''''''''''''''''''

``TypeVarTuple`` defaults are defined using the same syntax as
``TypeVar`` \ s but use an unpacked tuple of types instead of a single type
or another in-scope ``TypeVarTuple`` (see `Scoping Rules`_).

::

   DefaultTs = TypeVarTuple("DefaultTs", default=Unpack[tuple[str, int]])

   class Foo(Generic[*DefaultTs]): ...

   reveal_type(Foo)               # type is type[Foo[DefaultTs = *tuple[str, int]]]
   reveal_type(Foo())             # type is Foo[str, int]
   reveal_type(Foo[int, bool]())  # type is Foo[int, bool]

Using Another Type Parameter as ``default``
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

This allows for a value to be used again when the type parameter to a
generic is missing but another type parameter is specified.

To use another type parameter as a default the ``default`` and the
type parameter must be the same type (a ``TypeVar``'s default must be
a ``TypeVar``, etc.).

`This could be used on builtins.slice <https://github.com/python/typing/issues/159>`__
where the ``start`` parameter should default to ``int``, ``stop``
default to the type of ``start`` and step default to ``int | None``.

::

   StartT = TypeVar("StartT", default=int)
   StopT = TypeVar("StopT", default=StartT)
   StepT = TypeVar("StepT", default=int | None)

   class slice(Generic[StartT, StopT, StepT]): ...

   reveal_type(slice)  # type is type[slice[StartT = int, StopT = StartT, StepT = int | None]]
   reveal_type(slice())                        # type is slice[int, int, int | None]
   reveal_type(slice[str]())                   # type is slice[str, str, int | None]
   reveal_type(slice[str, bool, timedelta]())  # type is slice[str, bool, timedelta]

   T2 = TypeVar("T2", default=DefaultStrT)

   class Foo(Generic[DefaultStrT, T2]):
       def __init__(self, a: DefaultStrT, b: T2) -> None: ...

   reveal_type(Foo(1, ""))  # type is Foo[int, str]
   Foo[int](1, "")          # Invalid: Foo[int, str] cannot be assigned to self: Foo[int, int] in Foo.__init__
   Foo[int]("", 1)          # Invalid: Foo[str, int] cannot be assigned to self: Foo[int, int] in Foo.__init__

When using a type parameter as the default to another type parameter, the
following rules apply, where ``T1`` is the default for ``T2``.

Scoping Rules
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``T1`` must be used before ``T2`` in the parameter list of the generic.

::

   T2 = TypeVar("T2", default=T1)

   class Foo(Generic[T1, T2]): ...   # Valid
   class Foo(Generic[T1]):
       class Bar(Generic[T2]): ...   # Valid

   StartT = TypeVar("StartT", default="StopT")  # Swapped defaults around from previous example
   StopT = TypeVar("StopT", default=int)
   class slice(Generic[StartT, StopT, StepT]): ...
                     # ^^^^^^ Invalid: ordering does not allow StopT to be bound

Using a type parameter from an outer scope as a default is not supported.

Bound Rules
~~~~~~~~~~~

``T1``'s bound must be a subtype of ``T2``'s bound.

::

   T1 = TypeVar("T1", bound=int)
   TypeVar("Ok", default=T1, bound=float)     # Valid
   TypeVar("AlsoOk", default=T1, bound=int)   # Valid
   TypeVar("Invalid", default=T1, bound=str)  # Invalid: int is not a subtype of str

Constraint Rules
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The constraints of ``T2`` must be a superset of the constraints of ``T1``.

::

   T1 = TypeVar("T1", bound=int)
   TypeVar("Invalid", float, str, default=T1)         # Invalid: upper bound int is incompatible with constraints float or str

   T1 = TypeVar("T1", int, str)
   TypeVar("AlsoOk", int, str, bool, default=T1)      # Valid
   TypeVar("AlsoInvalid", bool, complex, default=T1)  # Invalid: {bool, complex} is not a superset of {int, str}


Type Parameters as Parameters to Generics
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Type parameters are valid as parameters to generics inside of a
``default`` when the first parameter is in scope as determined by the
`previous section <scoping rules_>`_.

::

   T = TypeVar("T")
   ListDefaultT = TypeVar("ListDefaultT", default=list[T])

   class Bar(Generic[T, ListDefaultT]):
       def __init__(self, x: T, y: ListDefaultT): ...

   reveal_type(Bar)                    # type is type[Bar[T, ListDefaultT = list[T]]]
   reveal_type(Bar[int])               # type is type[Bar[int, list[int]]]
   reveal_type(Bar[int]())             # type is Bar[int, list[int]]
   reveal_type(Bar[int, list[str]]())  # type is Bar[int, list[str]]
   reveal_type(Bar[int, str]())        # type is Bar[int, str]

Specialisation Rules
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Type parameters currently cannot be further subscripted. This might
change if `Higher Kinded TypeVars <https://github.com/python/typing/issues/548>`__
are implemented.


``Generic`` ``TypeAlias``\ es
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

``Generic`` ``TypeAlias``\ es should be able to be further subscripted
following normal subscription rules. If a type parameter has a default
that hasn't been overridden it should be treated like it was
substituted into the ``TypeAlias``. However, it can be specialised
further down the line.

::

   class SomethingWithNoDefaults(Generic[T, T2]): ...

   MyAlias: TypeAlias = SomethingWithNoDefaults[int, DefaultStrT]  # Valid
   reveal_type(MyAlias)          # type is type[SomethingWithNoDefaults[int, DefaultStrT]]
   reveal_type(MyAlias[bool]())  # type is SomethingWithNoDefaults[int, bool]

   MyAlias[bool, int]  # Invalid: too many arguments passed to MyAlias

Subclassing
'''''''''''

Subclasses of ``Generic``\ s with type parameters that have defaults
behave similarly to ``Generic`` ``TypeAlias``\ es. That is, subclasses can be
further subscripted following normal subscription rules, non-overridden
defaults should be substituted in, and type parameters with such defaults can be
further specialised down the line.

::

   class SubclassMe(Generic[T, DefaultStrT]):
       x: DefaultStrT

   class Bar(SubclassMe[int, DefaultStrT]): ...
   reveal_type(Bar)          # type is type[Bar[DefaultStrT = str]]
   reveal_type(Bar())        # type is Bar[str]
   reveal_type(Bar[bool]())  # type is Bar[bool]

   class Foo(SubclassMe[float]): ...

   reveal_type(Foo().x)  # type is str

   Foo[str]  # Invalid: Foo cannot be further subscripted

   class Baz(Generic[DefaultIntT, DefaultStrT]): ...

   class Spam(Baz): ...
   reveal_type(Spam())  # type is <subclass of Baz[int, str]>

Using ``bound`` and ``default``
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

If both ``bound`` and ``default`` are passed ``default`` must be a
subtype of ``bound``. Otherwise the type checker should generate an
error.

::

   TypeVar("Ok", bound=float, default=int)     # Valid
   TypeVar("Invalid", bound=str, default=int)  # Invalid: the bound and default are incompatible

Constraints
'''''''''''

For constrained ``TypeVar``\ s, the default needs to be one of the
constraints. A type checker should generate an error even if it is a
subtype of one of the constraints.

::

   TypeVar("Ok", float, str, default=float)     # Valid
   TypeVar("Invalid", float, str, default=int)  # Invalid: expected one of float or str got int

.. _696-function-defaults:

Function Defaults
'''''''''''''''''

In generic functions, type checkers may use a type parameter's default when the
type parameter cannot be solved to anything. We leave the semantics of this
usage unspecified, as ensuring the ``default`` is returned in every code path
where the type parameter can go unsolved may be too hard to implement. Type
checkers are free to either disallow this case or experiment with implementing
support.

::

   T = TypeVar('T', default=int)
   def func(x: int | set[T]) -> T: ...
   reveal_type(func(0))  # a type checker may reveal T's default of int here

Defaults following ``TypeVarTuple``
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

A ``TypeVar`` that immediately follows a ``TypeVarTuple`` is not allowed
to have a default, because it would be ambiguous whether a type argument
should be bound to the ``TypeVarTuple`` or the defaulted ``TypeVar``.

::

   Ts = TypeVarTuple("Ts")
   T = TypeVar("T", default=bool)

   class Foo(Generic[Ts, T]): ...  # Type checker error

   # Could be reasonably interpreted as either Ts = (int, str, float), T = bool
   # or Ts = (int, str), T = float
   Foo[int, str, float]

With the Python 3.12 built-in generic syntax, this case should raise a SyntaxError.

However, it is allowed to have a ``ParamSpec`` with a default following a
``TypeVarTuple`` with a default, as there can be no ambiguity between a type argument
for the ``ParamSpec`` and one for the ``TypeVarTuple``.

::

   Ts = TypeVarTuple("Ts")
   P = ParamSpec("P", default=[float, bool])

   class Foo(Generic[Ts, P]): ...  # Valid

   Foo[int, str]  # Ts = (int, str), P = [float, bool]
   Foo[int, str, [bytes]]  # Ts = (int, str), P = [bytes]

Subtyping
'''''''''

Type parameter defaults do not affect the subtyping rules for generic classes.
In particular, defaults can be ignored when considering whether a class is
compatible with a generic protocol.

``TypeVarTuple``\ s as Defaults
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Using a ``TypeVarTuple`` as a default is not supported because:

- `Scoping Rules`_ does not allow usage of type parameters
  from outer scopes.
- Multiple ``TypeVarTuple``\ s cannot appear in the type
  parameter list for a single object, as specified in
  :pep:`646#multiple-type-variable-tuples-not-allowed`.

These reasons leave no current valid location where a
``TypeVarTuple`` could be used as the default of another ``TypeVarTuple``.

Binding rules
-------------

Type parameter defaults should be bound by attribute access
(including call and subscript).

::

   class Foo[T = int]:
       def meth(self) -> Self:
           return self

   reveal_type(Foo.meth)  # type is (self: Foo[int]) -> Foo[int]


Implementation
--------------

At runtime, this would involve the following changes to the ``typing``
module.

- The classes ``TypeVar``, ``ParamSpec``, and ``TypeVarTuple`` should
  expose the type passed to ``default``. This would be available as
  a ``__default__`` attribute, which would be ``None`` if no argument
  is passed and ``NoneType`` if ``default=None``.

The following changes would be required to both ``GenericAlias``\ es:

-  logic to determine the defaults required for a subscription.
-  ideally, logic to determine if subscription (like
   ``Generic[T, DefaultT]``) would be valid.

The grammar for type parameter lists would need to be updated to
allow defaults; see below.

A reference implementation of the runtime changes can be found at
https://github.com/Gobot1234/cpython/tree/pep-696

A reference implementation of the type checker can be found at
https://github.com/Gobot1234/mypy/tree/TypeVar-defaults

Pyright currently supports this functionality.


Grammar changes
'''''''''''''''

The syntax added in :pep:`695` will be extended to introduce a way
to specify defaults for type parameters using the "=" operator inside
of the square brackets like so:

::

   # TypeVars
   class Foo[T = str]: ...

   # ParamSpecs
   class Baz[**P = [int, str]]: ...

   # TypeVarTuples
   class Qux[*Ts = *tuple[int, bool]]: ...

   # TypeAliases
   type Foo[T, U = str] = Bar[T, U]
   type Baz[**P = [int, str]] = Spam[**P]
   type Qux[*Ts = *tuple[str]] = Ham[*Ts]
   type Rab[U, T = str] = Bar[T, U]

:ref:`Similarly to the bound for a type parameter <695-scoping-behavior>`,
defaults should be lazily evaluated, with the same scoping rules to
avoid the unnecessary usage of quotes around them.

This functionality was included in the initial draft of :pep:`695` but
was removed due to scope creep.

The following changes would be made to the grammar::

    type_param:
        | a=NAME b=[type_param_bound] d=[type_param_default]
        | a=NAME c=[type_param_constraint] d=[type_param_default]
        | '*' a=NAME d=[type_param_default]
        | '**' a=NAME d=[type_param_default]

    type_param_default:
        | '=' e=expression
        | '=' e=starred_expression

The compiler would enforce that type parameters without defaults cannot
follow type parameters with defaults and that ``TypeVar``\ s with defaults
cannot immediately follow ``TypeVarTuple``\ s.

Rejected Alternatives
---------------------

Allowing the Type Parameters Defaults to Be Passed to ``type.__new__``'s ``**kwargs``
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

::

   T = TypeVar("T")

   @dataclass
   class Box(Generic[T], T=int):
       value: T | None = None

While this is much easier to read and follows a similar rationale to the
``TypeVar`` `unary
syntax <https://github.com/python/typing/issues/813>`__, it would not be
backwards compatible as ``T`` might already be passed to a
metaclass/superclass or support classes that don't subclass ``Generic``
at runtime.

Ideally, if :pep:`637` wasn't rejected, the following would be acceptable::

   T = TypeVar("T")

   @dataclass
   class Box(Generic[T = int]):
       value: T | None = None

Allowing Non-defaults to Follow Defaults
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

::

   YieldT = TypeVar("YieldT", default=Any)
   SendT = TypeVar("SendT", default=Any)
   ReturnT = TypeVar("ReturnT")

   class Coroutine(Generic[YieldT, SendT, ReturnT]): ...

   Coroutine[int] == Coroutine[Any, Any, int]

Allowing non-defaults to follow defaults would alleviate the issues with
returning types like ``Coroutine`` from functions where the most used
type argument is the last (the return). Allowing non-defaults to follow
defaults is too confusing and potentially ambiguous, even if only the
above two forms were valid. Changing the argument order now would also
break a lot of codebases. This is also solvable in most cases using a
``TypeAlias``.

::

   Coro: TypeAlias = Coroutine[Any, Any, T]
   Coro[int] == Coroutine[Any, Any, int]

Having ``default`` Implicitly Be ``bound``
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

In an earlier version of this PEP, the ``default`` was implicitly set
to ``bound`` if no value was passed for ``default``. This while
convenient, could have a type parameter with no default follow a
type parameter with a default. Consider:

::

   T = TypeVar("T", bound=int)  # default is implicitly int
   U = TypeVar("U")

   class Foo(Generic[T, U]):
       ...

   # would expand to

   T = TypeVar("T", bound=int, default=int)
   U = TypeVar("U")

   class Foo(Generic[T, U]):
       ...

This would have also been a breaking change for a small number of cases
where the code relied on ``Any`` being the implicit default.

Allowing Type Parameters With Defaults To Be Used in Function Signatures
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

A previous version of this PEP allowed ``TypeVarLike``\s with defaults to be used in
function signatures. This was removed for the reasons described in
`Function Defaults`_. Hopefully, this can be added in the future if
a way to get the runtime value of a type parameter is added.

Allowing Type Parameters from Outer Scopes in ``default``
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

This was deemed too niche a feature to be worth the added complexity.
If any cases arise where this is needed, it can be added in a future PEP.

Acknowledgements
----------------

Thanks to the following people for their feedback on the PEP:

Eric Traut, Jelle Zijlstra, Joshua Butt, Danny Yamamoto, Kaylynn Morgan
and Jakub Kuczys


Copyright
---------
This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
