PEP: 806
Title: Mixed sync/async context managers with precise async marking
Author: Zac Hatfield-Dodds <zac@zhd.dev>
Sponsor: Jelle Zijlstra <jelle.zijlstra@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: Pending
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Created: 05-Sep-2025
Python-Version: 3.15
Post-History:
  `22-May-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/92939/>`__,

Abstract
========

Python allows the ``with`` and ``async with`` statements to handle multiple
context managers in a single statement, so long as they are all respectively
synchronous or asynchronous.  When mixing synchronous and asynchronous context
managers, developers must use deeply nested statements or use risky workarounds
such as overuse of :class:`~contextlib.AsyncExitStack`.

We therefore propose to allow ``with`` statements to accept both synchronous
and asynchronous context managers in a single statement by prefixing individual
async context managers with the ``async`` keyword.

This change eliminates unnecessary nesting, improves code readability, and
improves ergonomics without making async code any less explicit.


Motivation
==========

Modern Python applications frequently need to acquire multiple resources, via
a mixture of synchronous and asynchronous context managers.  While the all-sync
or all-async cases permit a single statement with multiple context managers,
mixing the two results in the "staircase of doom":

.. code-block:: python

    async def process_data():
        async with acquire_lock() as lock:
            with temp_directory() as tmpdir:
                async with connect_to_db(cache=tmpdir) as db:
                    with open('config.json', encoding='utf-8') as f:
                        # We're now 16 spaces deep before any actual logic
                        config = json.load(f)
                        await db.execute(config['query'])
                        # ... more processing

This excessive indentation discourages use of context managers, despite their
desirable semantics.  See the `Rejected Ideas`_ section for current workarounds
and commentary on their downsides.

With this PEP, the function could instead be written:

.. code-block:: python

    async def process_data():
        with (
            async acquire_lock() as lock,
            temp_directory() as tmpdir,
            async connect_to_db(cache=tmpdir) as db,
            open('config.json', encoding='utf-8') as f,
        ):
            config = json.load(f)
            await db.execute(config['query'])
            # ... more processing

This compact alternative avoids forcing a new level of indentation on every
switch between sync and async context managers.  At the same time, it uses
only existing keywords, distinguishing async code with the ``async`` keyword
more precisely even than our current syntax.

We do not propose that the ``async with`` statement should ever be deprecated,
and indeed advocate its continued use for single-line statements so that
"async" is the first non-whitespace token of each line opening an async
context manager.

Our proposal nonetheless permits ``with async some_ctx()``, valuing consistent
syntax design over enforcement of a single code style which we expect will be
handled by style guides, linters, formatters, etc.
See `here <ban-single-line-with-async>` for further discussion.


Real-World Impact
-----------------

These enhancements address pain points that Python developers encounter daily.
We surveyed an industry codebase, finding more than ten thousand functions
containing at least one async context manager.  19% of these also contained a
sync context manager.  For reference, async functions contain sync context
managers about two-thirds as often as they contain async context managers.

39% of functions with both ``with`` and ``async with`` statements could switch
immediately to the proposed syntax, but this is a loose lower
bound due to avoidance of sync context managers and use of workarounds listed
under Rejected Ideas.  Based on inspecting a random sample of functions, we
estimate that between 20% and 50% of async functions containing any context
manager would use ``with async`` if this PEP is accepted.

Across the ecosystem more broadly, we expect lower rates, perhaps in the
5% to 20% range: the surveyed codebase uses structured concurrency with Trio,
and also makes extensive use of context managers to mitigate the issues
discussed in :pep:`533` and :pep:`789`.


Rationale
=========

Mixed sync/async context managers are common in modern Python applications,
such as async database connections or API clients and synchronous file
operations.  The current syntax forces developers to choose between deeply
nested code or error-prone workarounds like :class:`~contextlib.AsyncExitStack`.

This PEP addresses the problem with a minimal syntax change that builds on
existing patterns. By allowing individual context managers to be marked with
``async``, we maintain Python's explicit approach to asynchronous code while
eliminating unnecessary nesting.

The implementation as syntactic sugar ensures zero runtime overhead -- the new
syntax desugars to the same nested ``with`` and ``async with`` statements
developers write today. This approach requires no new protocols, no changes
to existing context managers, and no new runtime behaviors to understand.


Specification
=============

The ``with (..., async ...):`` syntax desugars into a sequence of context
managers in the same way as current multi-context ``with`` statements,
except that those prefixed by the ``async`` keyword use the ``__aenter__`` /
``__aexit__`` protocol.

Only the ``with`` statement is modified; ``async with async ctx():`` is a
syntax error.

The :class:`ast.withitem` node gains a new ``is_async`` integer attribute,
following the existing ``is_async`` attribute on :class:`ast.comprehension`.
For ``async with`` statement items, this attribute is always ``1``. For items
in a regular ``with`` statement, the attribute is ``1`` when the ``async``
keyword is present and ``0`` otherwise. This allows the AST to precisely
represent which context managers should use the async protocol while
maintaining backwards compatibility with existing AST processing tools.


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

This change is fully backwards compatible: the only observable difference is
that certain syntax that previously raised :exc:`SyntaxError` now executes
successfully.

Libraries that implement context managers (standard library and third-party)
work with the new syntax without modifications.  Libraries and tools which
work directly with source code will need minor updates, as for any new syntax.


How to Teach This
=================

We recommend introducing "mixed context managers" together with or immediately
after ``async with``.  For example, a tutorial might cover:

1. **Basic context managers**: Start with single ``with`` statements
2. **Multiple context managers**: Show the current comma syntax
3. **Async context managers**: Introduce ``async with``
4. **Mixed contexts**: "Mark each async context manager with ``async``"


Rejected Ideas
==============

Workaround: an ``as_acm()`` wrapper
-----------------------------------

It is easy to implement a helper function which wraps a synchronous context
manager in an async context manager.  For example:

.. code-block:: python

    @contextmanager
    async def as_acm(sync_cm):
        with sync_cm as result:
            await sleep(0)
            yield result

    async with (
        acquire_lock(),
        as_acm(open('file')) as f,
    ):
        ...

This is our recommended workaround for almost all code.

However, there are some cases where calling back into the async runtime (i.e.
executing ``await sleep(0)``) to allow cancellation is undesirable.  On the
other hand, *omitting* ``await sleep(0)`` would break the transitive property
that a syntactic ``await`` / ``async for`` / ``async with`` always calls back
into the async runtime (or raises an exception).  While few codebases enforce
this property, we have found it indispensible in preventing deadlocks.


Workaround: using ``AsyncExitStack``
------------------------------------

:class:`~contextlib.AsyncExitStack` offers a powerful, low-level interface
which allows for explicit entry of sync and/or async context managers.

.. code-block:: python

    async with contextlib.AsyncExitStack() as stack:
        await stack.enter_async_context(acquire_lock())
        f = stack.enter_context(open('file', encoding='utf-8'))
        ...

However, :class:`~contextlib.AsyncExitStack` introduces significant complexity
and potential for errors - it's easy to violate properties that syntactic use
of context managers would guarantee, such as 'last-in, first-out' order.


Workaround: ``AsyncExitStack``-based helper
-------------------------------------------

We could also implement a ``multicontext()`` wrapper, which avoids some of the
downsides of direct use of :class:`~contextlib.AsyncExitStack`:

.. code-block:: python

    async with multicontext(
        acquire_lock(),
        open('file'),
    ) as (f, _):
        ...

However, this helper breaks the locality of ``as`` clauses, which makes it
easy to accidentally mis-assign the yielded variables (as in the code sample).
It also requires either distinguishing sync from async context managers using
something like a tagged union - perhaps overload an operator so that, e.g.,
``async_ @ acquire_lock()`` works - or else guessing what to do with objects
that implement both sync and async context-manager protocols.
Finally, it has the error-prone semantics around exception handling which led
`contextlib.nested()`__ to be deprecated in favor of the multi-argument
``with`` statement.

__ https://docs.python.org/2.7/library/contextlib.html#contextlib.nested


Syntax: allow ``async with sync_cm, async_cm:``
-----------------------------------------------

An early draft of this proposal used ``async with`` for the entire statement
when mixing context managers, *if* there is at least one async context manager:

.. code-block:: python

    # Rejected approach
    async with (
        acquire_lock(),
        open('config.json') as f,  # actually sync, surprise!
    ):
        ...

Requiring an async context manager maintains the syntax/scheduler link, but at
the cost of setting invisible constraints on future code changes.  Removing
one of several context managers could cause runtime errors, if that happened
to be the last async context manager!

Explicit is better than implicit.


.. _ban-single-line-with-async:

Syntax: ban single-line ``with async ...``
------------------------------------------

Our proposed syntax could be restricted, e.g. to place ``async`` only as the
first token of lines in a parenthesised multi-context ``with`` statement.
This is indeed how we recommend it should be used, and we expect that most
uses will indeed follow this pattern.

While an option to write either ``async with ctx():`` or ``with async ctx():``
may cause some small confusion due to ambiguity, we think that enforcing a
preferred style via the syntax would make Python more confusing to learn,
and thus prefer simple syntactic rules plus community conventions on how to
use them.

To illustrate, we do not see a clear dividing line between any two of the
following code samples::

.. code-block:: python

    with (
        sync_context() as foo,
        async a_context() as bar,
    ): ...

    with (
        sync_context() as foo,
        async a_context()
    ): ...

    with (
        # sync_context() as foo,
        async a_context()
    ): ...

    with (async a_context()): ...

    with async a_context(): ...


Acknowledgements
================

Thanks to Rob Rolls for `proposing`__ ``with async``.  Thanks also to the many
other people with whom we discussed this problem and possible solutions at the
PyCon 2025 sprints, on Discourse, and at work.

__ https://discuss.python.org/t/92939/10


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
