PEP: 802
Title: Display Syntax for the Empty Set
Author: Adam Turner <python@quite.org.uk>
Discussions-To: Pending
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Created: 08-Aug-2025
Python-Version: 3.15


Abstract
========

We propose a new notation, ``{/}``, to construct and represent the empty set.
This is modelled after the corresponding mathematical symbol ':math:`\emptyset`'.

This complements the existing notation for empty tuples, lists, and
dictionaries, which use ``()``, ``[]``, and ``{}`` respectively.


Motivation
==========

Sets are currently the only built-in collection type that have a
:ref:`display syntax <python:comprehensions>`,
but no notation to express an empty collection.
The :ref:`Python Language Reference <python:set>` notes this, stating:

   An empty set cannot be constructed with ``{}``;
   this literal constructs an empty dictionary.

This can be confusing for beginners, especially those coming to the language
from a scientific or mathematical background, where sets may be in more common
use than dictionaries or maps.

A syntax notation for the empty set has the important benefit of not requiring
a name lookup (unlike ``set()``).
``{/}`` will always have a consistent meaning, improving teachability
of core concepts to beginners.
For example, users must be careful not to use ``set`` as a local variable name,
as doing so prevents constructing new sets.
This can be frustrating as beginners may not know how to recover the
:py:class:`set` type if they have overriden the name:
techniques to do so (e.g. ``type({1}-{1})``) are not immediately obvious.

Finally, this may be helpful for users who do not speak English,
as it provides a culture-free notation for a common data structure
that is built into the language.


Rationale
=========

Sets were introduced to Python 2.2 via :pep:`218`, which did not include
set notation, but discussed the idea of ``{-}`` for the empty set:

    The PEP originally proposed ``{1,2,3}`` as the set notation and ``{-}`` for
    the empty set.  Experience with Python 2.3's ``sets.py`` showed that
    the notation was not necessary.  Also, there was some risk of making
    dictionaries less instantly recognizable.

Python 3.0 introduced set literals (:pep:`3100`), but again chose not to
introduce notation for the empty set, which was omitted out of pragmatism
(`python-3000, April 2006`_, `python-3000, May 2006`_).

Since then, the topic has been discussed several times,
with various proposals, including:

#. Changing ``{}`` to mean an empty set and using ``{:}`` for an empty dictionary
   (`python-ideas, January 2008`_, `Discourse, March 2023`_)
#. A Unicode character (e.g. ``∅`` or ``ϕ``)
   (`python-ideas, April 2021`_)
#. ``<>``
   (`python-ideas, November 2010`_, `Discourse, December 2024`_)
#. ``s{}``
   (`python-ideas, June 2009`_)
#. ``{*()}``, perhaps optimising to compile this to the ``BUILD_SET`` opcode
   (`Discourse, August 2025 (#37)`_)
#. ``{-}``
   (`python-ideas, August 2020`_)
#. ``{,}``
   (`Discourse, August 2025`_)
#. ``{/}``
   (`python-ideas, January 2008`_)
#. ``set()`` (i.e. doing nothing)

The authors propose ``{/}`` as the notation,
being in their opinion the best of these options.
It is simple and concise, with the benefit of resembling the mathematical
notation for the empty set, :math:`\emptyset`.
This makes it an easier mnemonic to explain than several in the language,
such as ``**`` for exponentiation or ``@`` for matrix multiplication.

The ``{/}`` notation was also the most popular in a `recent Discourse poll`_,
selected by 41% of respondents overall and 60% of those voting for a new syntax.

Brief summaries for the other proposals may be found in `Rejected Ideas`_.


Specification
=============

The grammar for set displays will become:

.. productionlist:: python-grammar
   set_display: "{" ("/" | flexible_expression_list | comprehension) "}"

``{/}`` will become the default syntax for the empty set.

.. code-block:: python

   >>> type({/})
   <class 'set'>
   >>> {/} == set()
   True

The representation and string forms of the empty set will change to ``'{/}'``.

.. code-block:: python

   >>> repr({/})
   '{/}'
   >>> str({/})
   '{/}'

There will be no behavioural changes to :py:class:`set` objects.


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Code that relies on the ``repr()`` or ``str()`` of the empty set
will no longer work, because the representation will change.

There will be no other backwards incompatibile changes,
all current constructors for the empty set will continue to work,
and the behaviour of the :py:class:`set` type will remain unchanged.


Security Implications
=====================

None.


How to Teach This
=================

All users can be taught that ``{/}`` is the new spelling for ``set()``,
and that it is equivalent in all other ways.
To help reinforce this, we will update the documentation to use ``{/}``
instead of ``set()``, including the tutorial, standard libary modules,
and the Python Language Reference.

For new users, sets can be introduced through syntax, noting that the four
built-in collection types with syntax all have empty forms:
``()``, ``[]``, ``{/}``, and ``{}``.

The empty set uses a forwards slash to differentiate it from
an empty dictionary.
It uses this syntax because it looks like the mathematical symbol
for the empty set (':math:`\emptyset`').
It is also similar to the syntax for other sets,
which use a comma to separate elements, e.g. ``{2, 3, 5}``.
These facts can be used as a helpful mnemonic.


Reference Implementation
========================

Forthcoming.


Rejected Ideas
==============

Change ``{}`` to mean an empty set and use ``{:}`` for an empty dictionary
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

This would be an entirely backwards incompatible change,
all current empty :py:class:`dict` objects would become sets.

Use a Unicode character (e.g. ``∅`` or ``ϕ``)
---------------------------------------------

The Unicode character 'U+2205 ∅ EMPTY SET' is not currently a valid identifier.
Introducing a Unicode character as syntax would be hard to use,
as it does not appear on standard keyboards.

Using other characters that look like ∅, such as 'U+03C6 ϕ GREEK SMALL LETTER
PHI' or 'U+00D8 Ø LATIN CAPITAL LETTER O WITH STROKE', would be more confusing
with the same drawbacks of using a Unicode character.

Use the ``<>`` syntax
---------------------

It does not have a resemblance to the syntax for non-empty sets.
This would be harder to explain than this PEP's proposal.

This syntax further has historic use as the inequality operator,
which can still be accessed via ``from __future__ import barry_as_FLUFL``.
Using both the ``barry_as_FLUFL`` future import and ``<>`` for the empty set
would lead to parser ambiguity: what would ``<> <> <>`` mean?

Use the ``s{}`` syntax
----------------------

This syntax may cause confusion with ``s`` as a local variable.
The only current use of prefixes of this kind is for string literals.
This would be harder to explain than this PEP's proposal.

Use the ``{*()}`` syntax
------------------------

This relies on unpacking the empty tuple into a set, creating an empty set.
This has the benefit of support since Python 3.5 (:pep:`448`), but is unwieldy
and complicated to explain; it was not designed for this purpose.

Use the ``{-}`` syntax
----------------------

This syntax was originally proposed in :pep:`218`,
but removed from the PEP before it was accepted.
The authors prefer ``{/}`` due to the resemblance to :math:`\emptyset`.

Use the ``{,}`` syntax
----------------------

This is the authors' next preferred option.
However, if a single comma were to be used to represent an empty collection,
it may be confusing why this could not be used for empty tuples or lists.
In time, there might be proposals to add support for ``[,]`` and ``(,)``.
This conflicts with the general principle that
'*there should be one-- and preferably only one --obvious way to do it*'.
Having a visibly different form, in ``{/}``, helps to reinforce the idea
that the syntax for the empty set is a special case, rather than a general rule
for all empty collections.


Open Issues
===========

None.


Acknowledgements
================

* Chris Angelico, Dominykas Grigonis, Ben Hsing, James Webber,
  and other contributors to recent Discourse topics.
* Hugo van Kemenade, for helpful feedback on a draft of the PEP.


Footnotes
=========

.. _Discourse, August 2025 (#37): https://discuss.python.org/t/101197/37
.. _Discourse, August 2025: https://discuss.python.org/t/101197
.. _Discourse, December 2024: https://discuss.python.org/t/73235
.. _Discourse, March 2023: https://discuss.python.org/t/25213
.. _explicitly deferred: https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-3000/2006-May/001599.html
.. _python-3000, April 2006: https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-3000/2006-April/001286.html
.. _python-3000, May 2006: https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-3000/2006-May/001666.html
.. _python-ideas, April 2021: https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-ideas@python.org/message/X4TX2HDNKDJ7PVZL3DVI5QD2MIMRHKO4/
.. _python-ideas, August 2020: https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-ideas@python.org/message/QOBONXUPUMC3ULCGJU6FVHOCIZQDT45W/
.. _python-ideas, January 2008: https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-ideas@python.org/thread/IBMTTESRSF5755LNMVTUMHHABKOBSPUZ/#IBMTTESRSF5755LNMVTUMHHABKOBSPUZ
.. _python-ideas, June 2009: https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-ideas@python.org/thread/AMWKPS54ZK6X2FI7NICDM6DG7LERIJFV/#AMWKPS54ZK6X2FI7NICDM6DG7LERIJFV
.. _python-ideas, November 2010: https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-ideas@python.org/thread/N7CHDYXW2FYHDJ5BTP7CCC5HLAIINOVH/#N7CHDYXW2FYHDJ5BTP7CCC5HLAIINOVH
.. _recent Discourse poll: https://discuss.python.org/t/101197/15


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
