PEP: 9999
Title: Standardizing selection of Python package files across multiple sources
Author: Michael Sarahan, msarahan@gmail.com
Sponsor: Barry Warsaw, barry@python.org
PEP-Delegate: <PEP delegate’s real name>
Discussions-To: <REQUIRED: URL of current canonical discussion thread>
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Requires: 777
Created: 05-Nov-2024
Post-History: <REQUIRED: dates, in dd-mmm-yyyy format, and corresponding links to PEP discussion threads>

Abstract
========

Python installers are diverging with respect to how they handle multiple
indexes. Pip merges all indexes before matching distributions, while uv
matches distributions on one index before moving on to the next. Each
approach has advantages and disadvantages. This PEP aims to standardize
each of these behaviors, which are referred to as “version priority” and
“index priority” respectively, so that community discussions and
troubleshooting can share a common vocabulary. Codifying these behaviors
will also facilitate building tools that rely on these behaviors.

Motivation
==========

Goals
-----

- Establish standard for evaluation order of various levels of priority
  between indexes and packages
- Standardize verbiage of different approaches, so that cross-tool
  discussions are talking “apples to apples”
- Suggest standard configuration options, to minimize user cognitive
  load between tools
- Provide guidelines for how ecosystem tools should implement index
  priority if they would like, and suggest reasons why they might want
  to do so

Non-goals
---------

- Do not relax the simplifying assumption that for a given distribution
  filename, all indexes must have the same file. This has been expressed
  as “all indexes are equal priority”, but can be more accurately
  described as “`pip considers all distributions with the same name and
  version to be interchangeable regardless of which index they came
  from <https://github.com/astral-sh/uv/issues/171#issuecomment-1952079681>`__.”
  This is a key assumption for how pip behaves today, and changing this
  assumption is deemed too disruptive for this PEP.
- Do not promote index priority as a solution to dependency confusion.
  It is related, but `PEP 708 <https://peps.python.org/pep-0708/>`__ is
  a better, more specific solution that does not require user
  configuration
- Do not dictate that every tool must implement every strategy

Rationale
=========

This PEP proposes standards of installer behavior when using multiple
sources, so that the user experience and expectations across tools is
more homogeneous. Pip has long defined the de-facto standard installer
behavior in the ecosystem, but new tools have been implementing new
approaches. Uv and PDM have each added support for some notion of index
priority.

Index priority is `the default behavior in
uv <https://docs.astral.sh/uv/pip/compatibility/#packages-that-exist-on-multiple-indexes>`__,
and supported, but `not default behavior in
PDM <https://pdm-project.org/latest/usage/config/#respect-the-order-of-the-sources>`__.
In uv, `users have reported some
issues <https://github.com/astral-sh/uv/issues/2775>`__ with the
behavior and asked for keeping pip’s behavior. Uv provides this choice
as a ``--index-strategy`` flag, with the ``unsafe-best-match`` value
matching pip’s current behavior, and the ``first-match`` value matching
this PEP’s proposed behavior. Defining index priority is expected to
help with `situations where a local package has remote
dependencies <https://github.com/pypa/pip/issues/11624>`__, and the user
wishes to prioritize local packages over remote dependencies, while
still falling back to remote dependencies where needed.

The topic of prioritizing indexes is being proposed as a PEP rather than
as a change specifically to pip, because predictable index behavior
across the many tools in our ecosystem is important for consistent,
predictable behavior between tools.

Specification
=============

“Version priority”
------------------

This is pip’s current behavior. All distributions from all configured
repositories are collated, and the “best” among them is selected. The
criteria for what is “best” are:

- `Match any specified
  hashes <https://github.com/pypa/pip/blob/111eed14b6e9fba7c78a5ec2b7594812d17b5d2b/src/pip/_internal/index/package_finder.py#L541>`__
- `Absence of
  yanking <https://github.com/pypa/pip/blob/111eed14b6e9fba7c78a5ec2b7594812d17b5d2b/src/pip/_internal/index/package_finder.py#L542>`__
- `Wheels over
  sdists <https://github.com/pypa/pip/blob/111eed14b6e9fba7c78a5ec2b7594812d17b5d2b/src/pip/_internal/index/package_finder.py#L504>`__
- `Maximize
  version <https://github.com/pypa/pip/blob/111eed14b6e9fba7c78a5ec2b7594812d17b5d2b/src/pip/_internal/index/package_finder.py#L544>`__
  (including `Local version
  tags <https://peps.python.org/pep-0440/#local-version-identifiers>`__,
  `restricted to locally patched private
  versions <https://discuss.python.org/t/lets-permit-local-version-label-in-version-specifiers/22781/2>`__)
- `Maximize specificity of platform
  tag <https://github.com/pypa/pip/blob/111eed14b6e9fba7c78a5ec2b7594812d17b5d2b/src/pip/_internal/index/package_finder.py#L520>`__
- `Build
  tags <https://github.com/pypa/pip/blob/111eed14b6e9fba7c78a5ec2b7594812d17b5d2b/src/pip/_internal/index/package_finder.py#L535>`__
  with the first value being an integer interpreted as ascending values
  being “better”, and the second being a string with lexical sorting

This behavior is characterized by the installer always getting the
latest version of a package, regardless of the repository that it comes
from. It is especially useful when all configured repositories are
equally trusted and well-behaved regarding the distribution
interchangeability assumption. That interchangeability assumption is
what makes comparing distributions of a given package meaningful -
without it, the installer is no longer comparing “apples to apples.” In
practice, it is common for different indexes to have files that have
different contents than other indexes, such as builds for special
hardware, and this version priority behavior can lead to undesirable,
unexpected outcomes.

Uv refers to `its implementation of the version priority
behavior <https://docs.astral.sh/uv/pip/compatibility/#packages-that-exist-on-multiple-indexes>`__
as “``unsafe-best-match``.” Naming is really hard here. On one hand, it
isn’t accurate to call pip’s default behavior intrinsically “unsafe.”
The addition of possibly malicious indexes/repositories is what
introduces concern with this behavior. PEP 708 added a way to restrict
installers from drawing packages from unexpected, potentially insecure
indexes. On the other hand, the term “best-match” is technically
correct, but also misleading. The “best match” varies by user and by
application. “Best” is technically correct in the sense that it is a
global optimum according to the match criteria specified above, but that
is not necessarily what is “best” in a user’s eyes. “Version priority”
is a proposed term that avoids the concerns with the uv terminology,
while approximating the behavior in the most user-identifiable way that
packages are compared.

“Index priority”
----------------

Relative to “version priority” behavior, this strategy does not collate
the contents of each index before evaluating the best match. Where the
best-match behavior seeks a global best match across all repositories,
the first-match strategy seeks a local best match within one repo, and
accepts the first match that it finds. The uv and PDM projects have led
the way in experimenting with different ways of dealing with multiple
package sources. Uv’s default behavior is one that implements
first-match behavior (and coins the terms “first-match” and
“best-match”). In general, the strategy evaluates best match on the
top-priority repo, and proceeds to subsequent repos only if the current
package request has no viable candidates. The criteria and process for
evaluating “best match” is the same for both index priority and version
priority. The difference is that version priority combines all indexes
before ordering and prioritizing them, while index priority iterates
over the indexes in user-specified order, stopping at the first matching
distribution. The index (or “source” in PDM terms) priority is
explicitly defined by a configuration hierarchy. Each package’s finder
starts at the beginning of the list of repositories, so each package
starts over with the repository list. In other words, if one package has
no valid candidates on the first index, but finds a hit on the second
index, subsequent packages still start their search on the first index,
rather than starting on the second.

One desirable behavior that the index priority strategy implies is that
there are no “surprise” updates, where a version bump on a
lower-priority repo wins out over a curated, approved higher-priority
repo. This is related to the security improvement of PEP 708, where
packages can restrict the external repos that distributions can come
from, but it is more configurable by end users. The package installs are
only expected to change when either the higher-priority repo or the
index priority configuration change. This stability and predictability
makes it viable to configure indexes as a more persistent property of an
environment, rather than a one-off argument for one install command.

One important implementation detail of index priority is that caching
should now include the index from which distributions were downloaded.
Without this aspect, it is possible that after changing the list of
configured indexes, the cache could provide a similarly-named
distribution from a lower-priority index. If every index follows the
recommended behavior of providing identical files across indexes for a
given filename, this is not an issue. However, that recommendation is
not readily enforceable, and augmenting the cache key with origin index
would be a wise defensive change.

Ways that a request falls through to a lower priority index
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Package name is not present at all in higher priority index
- All distributions from higher priority index filtered out due to
  version specifier, python version, platform tag, yanking or otherwise
- A denylist specifies that a particular package name should be ignored
  on a given index
- A higher priority index is unreachable (e.g. blocked by firewall
  rules, temporarily unavailable due to maintenance, other miscellaneous
  and temporary networking issues). This is a less clear-cut detail that
  should be controllable by users. On one hand, this behavior would lead
  to less predictable, likely unreproducible results by unexpectedly
  falling through to lower priority indexes. On the other hand, graceful
  fallback may be more valuable to some users, especially if they can
  safely assume that all of their indexes are equally trusted. Pip’s
  behavior today is graceful fallback: you see warnings if an index is
  having connection issues, but the installation will proceed with any
  other available indexes. Because index priority can convey different
  trust levels between indexes, installers should default to raising
  errors and aborting on network issues, but there should be a flag to
  allow fall-through to lower-priority indexes.

Treatment within a given index follows existing behavior, but stops at
the bounds of one index and moves on to the next index only after all
priority preferences within the one index are exhausted. This means that
existing priorities among the unified collection of packages apply to
each index individually before falling through to a lower priority
index.

- wheel vs sdist: Wheels are preferred within one index. The resolution
  will use an sdist from a higher-priority index before trying a wheel
  from a lower-priority index.
- more platform-specific wheels before less specific ones. The
  resolution will use less specific wheels from higher-priority indexes
  before using more specific wheels from lower priority indexes.

Priority configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The order of specification of indexes determines their priority in the
finding process. As a result, the way that installers load the index
configuration must be predictable and reproducible. The configuration
precedence hierarchy proposed here matches `the existing pip
configuration
hierarchy <https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/topics/configuration/#precedence-override-order>`__.
Other tools should ideally conform to this hierarchy for predictable
behavior, but ultimately are free to define or retain their existing
configuration schemes to maintain idiomatic usage for themselves.
Notably, some tools differ in whether multiple sources of configuration
add to one another (conda), or preclude/clobber one another (pip).

The order of specified URLs will follow:

1. | CLI arguments (if present), as in:
   | ``--extra-index-url <highest> --find-links <next_priority> --extra-index-url <lowest>``

2. Environment variables (if present), with ordered evaluation:

   1. PIP FIND_LINKS=”<highest_links> <next_priority_links> <lowest_links>”
   2. PIP_EXTRA_INDEX_URL=”<highest_index> <next_priority_index> <lowest_index>”

3. Configuration files, as in \`pip.conf\`:

   | [global]
   | extra_index_url =
   | <highest_index>
   | <next_priority_index>
   | <lowest_index>
   | find_links =
   | <highest_links>
   | <next_priority_links>
   | <lowest_links>

Ordering source types
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are two "source types" supported by pip:

- ``find-links / PIP_FIND_LINKS``
- ``extra-index-url / PIP_EXTRA_INDEX_URL``

The ``find-links`` option specifies one or more paths to search for
packages. It behaves very much like an index URL, except that it
searches filesystems, rather than resolving distribution filenames from
PEP 503 HTML or PEP 691 JSON data. This parameter is often passed with
the \`no-index\` parameter as a way of forcing the local packages to be
used. For the purposes of index priority, the ``find-links`` parameter
takes precedence over the values from ``extra-index-url``. The order of
these flags in a configuration file must not affect this evaluation
order. If both are defined, the value of ``extra-index-url`` is appended
to the value of ``find-links``. This is in keeping with `pip’s current
handling <https://github.com/pypa/pip/blob/e98cc5ce078d8c8afd6804ff4e61aa2b12d05715/src/pip/_internal/index/package_finder.py#L849>`__
of these options.

These source types can be specified in the three ways listed above: CLI,
environment variables, and configuration files. Among these, CLI flags have an
intrinsic evaluation order from left to right, and different source types can be
interleaved. In contrast, configuration files and in environment variables, the
state of several variables all exists simultaneously. There is no way to
interleave source types. For the sake of consistency among the three places
where configuration can be specified, the interleaving capability of the CLI
should not be respected. Instead, entries from each of the two source types should
be collected into their respective groups, and these groups should be evaluated
in the same order as environment variables and configuration files.

For example, the CLI example given above will evaluate with pseudocode:

::

   --extra-index-url <highest> --find-links <next_priority> --extra-index-url <lowest>
   # ------------
   find_links = []
   extra_index_urls = []
   for argname, value in cli_args:
     match argname:
       case "find-links":
         find_links.append(value)
       case "extra-index-url":
         extra_index_urls.append(value)
   search_urls = find_links + extra_index_urls


The ultimate result of this evalution will be:

1. next_priority
2. highest
3. lowest

The value of ``index-url`` (or its default value of PyPI) is always the
lowest-priority entry in the search order.

Requirements.txt file inclusions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As a further complication, `requirements.txt files can include index url
options <https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/reference/requirements-file-format/#global-options>`__,
including ``--extra-index-url`` and ``--find-links``. Requirements.txt
can be included via an environment variable (PIP_REQUIREMENT) and `by
command line
arguments <https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/cli/pip_install/#cmdoption-r>`__.
For the purposes of evaluating priority, these requirements files should
be evaluated where they are specified (i.e. their position on the CLI
args), and place their index url options at the priority of the
originating file inclusion (either the env var or CLI args). For
example, if a requirements.txt file has:

::

   --extra-index-url <req_file_index_url_1>
   --find-links <some_local_path>
   --extra-index-url <req_file_index_url_2>
   my-package

The CLI command of:

::

   pip install --extra-index-url <something> -r requirements.txt --extra-index-url <another>

Would expand to an index priority list of:

1. <some_local_path>
2. <something>
3. <req_file_index_url_1>
4. <req_file_index_url_2>
5. <another>
6. <fallback to value of index-url>

Because the requirements.txt file is parsed from top to bottom, it
evaluates ``--extra-index-url`` and ``--find-links`` arguments in the
order that they appear in the requirements.txt file, as opposed to
reordering them such that ``--find-links`` arguments always come before
any ``--extra-index-url`` arguments. Requirements files may also include
other requirements files. In the general case, depth-first
traversal of requirements files defines the collection and ordering
of index-urls and find-links options.

Proposed deny list format
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As described above, `it may be desirable to intentionally omit one or
more packages from consideration on a given
index <https://github.com/astral-sh/uv/issues/4753>`__. For example, if
a repository includes builds of a package that introduces issues, but
otherwise has more desirable packages, the one problematic package can
be omitted. The configuration for this denylist should include a list of
mappings from repository URL to a list of package names with optional
version constraints:

::

   repository_package_exclusions:
     - url: https://some-index.com
       packages:
         - some-problem-package-name<=3.5

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

This PEP does not prescribe any changes as mandatory for any installer,
so it only introduces compatibility concerns if tools choose to adopt an
index behavior other than the behavior(s) they currently implement.

This PEP’s language does not quite align with existing tools, including
pip and uv. Either this PEP’s language can change during review, or if
this PEP’s language is preferred, other projects could conform to it.
The important thing is that all the projects are using the same language
for the same concepts.

As some tools rely on one or the other behavior, there are some possible
issues that may emerge, where tailoring available resources/packages for
a particular behavior may detract from the user experience for people
who rely on the other behavior.

- Different repos may have different metadata. For example, one cannot
  assume that the metadata for package “something” on repository “A” has
  the same dependencies as “something” on repository “B”. When an
  installer falls back to a different repository in the search order, it
  implies refreshing the package metadata from the new repository. This
  is both an improvement and a complication. It is a complication in the
  sense that a cached metadata entry must be keyed by both package name
  and index url, instead of just package name. It is a potential
  improvement in that different implementation variants of a package can
  differ in dependencies as long as their distributions are separated
  into different indexes.
- Users may not get updates as they expect, because some higher priority
  index has not updated/synchronized with PyPI to get the latest
  packages. If the higher priority index has a valid candidate, newer
  packages will not be found. This will need to be communicated
  verbosely, because it is counter to pip’s well-established behavior.
- Improving the predictability of which repository will be selected may
  tempt people into using index priority as a way of having similarly
  named files that have different contents. It would be helpful if tools
  errored on mismatching hashes, or otherwise gave the user feedback
  that they are breaking a key assumption. This PEP does not mandate
  alternative fixes, such as augmenting the cache key with the index,
  because these changes have unknown unintended consequences. However,
  it is advisable to augment the cache key with the index, as doing so
  would remedy known “gotchas.”

Security Implications
=====================

Index priority creates a mechanism for users to explicitly specify a
trust hierarchy among their indexes. As such, it limits the potential
for dependency confusion attacks. Index priority was `rejected by PEP
708 <https://peps.python.org/pep-0708/#provide-a-mechanism-to-order-the-repositories>`__
as a solution for dependency confusion attacks. This PEP requests that
the rejection be reconsidered, with index priority serving a different
purpose. This PEP is primarily motivated by the desire to support
implementation variants, which is the subject of `another discussion
that hopefully leads to a
PEP <https://discuss.python.org/t/selecting-variant-wheels-according-to-a-semi-static-specification/53446>`__.
It is not mutually exclusive with PEP 708, nor does it suggest reverting
or withdrawing PEP 708. It is an answer to “\ `how we could allow users
to choose which index to use at a more fine grained level than “per
install”. <https://github.com/astral-sh/uv/issues/171#issuecomment-1952291242>`__

For a more thorough discussion of the PEP 708 rejection of index
priority, please see `the section below <#bookmark=id.wca5suv4ctal>`__.

How to Teach This
=================

At the outset, the goal is not to convert pip or any other tool to
change its default priority behavior. The best way to teach is perhaps
to watch message boards, GitHub issue trackers and chat channels,
keeping an eye out for problems that index priority could help solve.
There are `several <https://github.com/pypa/pip/issues/8606>`__
`long-standing <https://stackoverflow.com/questions/67253141/python-pip-priority-order-with-index-url-and-extra-index-url>`__
`discussions <https://github.com/pypa/pip/issues/5045>`__
`that <https://discuss.python.org/t/dependency-notation-including-the-index-url/5659>`__
`would <https://github.com/pypa/pip/issues/9612>`__ be good places to
start advertising the concepts. The topics of the two officially
supported behaviors need documentation, and we, the authors of this
PEP, would develop these as part of the review period of this PEP.
These docs would likely consist of additions across several
repositories, cross-linking the concepts between installers. At a
minimum, we expect to add to the
`PyPUG <https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/>`__ and to `pip’s
documentation <https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/cli/pip_install/>`__.

It will be important to advertise the active behavior, especially in
error messaging, and that will provide ways to provide resources to
users about these behaviors.

Uv users are already experiencing index priority. Uv `documents this
behavior <https://docs.astral.sh/uv/pip/compatibility/#packages-that-exist-on-multiple-indexes>`__
well, but it is always possible to `improve the
discoverability <https://github.com/astral-sh/uv/issues/4389>`__ of that
documentation from the command line, `where users will actually
encounter the unexpected
behavior <https://github.com/astral-sh/uv/issues/5146>`__.

Reference Implementation
========================

The uv project demonstrates index priority with its default behavior. Uv
is implemented in Rust, though, so if a python reference implementation
is necessary, we, the authors of this PEP, will provide one. For pip in
particular, we see the implementation plan as something like:

- For users who don’t use ``--extra-index-url`` or ``--find-links``,
  there will be no change, and no migration is necessary.
- Pip users would be able opt in to the index priority behavior with a
  new config setting in the CLI and in pip.conf. This proposal does not
  recommend any strategy as the default for any installer. It only
  recommends documenting the strategies that a tool provides.
- Enable extra info-level output for any pip operation where more than
  one index is used. In this output, state the current strategy setting,
  and a terse summary of implied behavior, as well as a link to docs
  that describe the different options
- Add debugging output that verbosely identifies the index being used at
  each step, including where the file is in the configuration hierarchy,
  and where it is being included (via config file, env var, or CLI
  flag).
- Plumb tracking of which repository gets used for which
  package/distribution through the entire pip install process. Store
  this information so that it is available to tools like ``pip freeze``
- Supplement PEP 751 (lockfiles) with capture of repository where a
  package/distribution came from

Rejected Ideas
==============

- Tell users to set up a proxy/mirror, such as devpi or artifactory that
  serves local files if present, and forwards to another server (PyPI)
  if no local files match

  This matches the behavior of this proposal very closely, except that
  this method requires hosting some server, and may be inaccessible or
  not configurable to users in some environments. It is also important
  to consider that for an organization that operates its own repository
  (for overcoming PyPI size restrictions, for example), this does not
  solve the need for ``--extra-index-url`` or proxy/mirror for end
  users. That is, organizations get no improvement from this approach
  unless they proxy/mirror PyPI as a whole, and get users to configure
  their proxy/mirror as their sole repository.

- Provide tiers of priorities, but keep version priority within groups.
  For example, `Poetry specifies “primary” and “supplemental”
  tiers <https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/cli/pip_install/>`__.

  This keeps control in the hands of the user, rather than an
  administrator, but adds complexity. Its behavior within a group is
  meant to mimic pip’s behavior without index priority, which is an
  anti-goal of this proposal. The granularity of `specifying per-package
  sources <https://python-poetry.org/docs/repositories/#package-source-constraint>`__,
  solves the ambiguity problem, at the cost of flexibility/portability
  of those sources.

- Are build tags and/or local version specifiers enough?

  Build tags and local version specifiers will take precedence over
  packages without those tags and/or local version specifiers. In a pool
  of packages, builds that have these additions hosted on a server other
  than PyPI will take priority over packages on PyPI, which rarely use
  build tags, and forbid local version specifiers. This approach is
  viable when package providers want to provide their own local
  override, such as `HPC maintainers who provide optimized builds for
  their
  users <https://github.com/ComputeCanada/software-stack/blob/main/pip-which-version.md>`__.
  It is less viable in some ways, such as build tags not showing up in
  ``pip freeze`` metadata, and `local version specifiers not being
  allowed on
  PyPI <https://discuss.python.org/t/lets-permit-local-version-label-in-version-specifiers/22781>`__.
  There is also significant work entailed in building and maintaining
  package collections with local build tag variants.

  https://discuss.python.org/t/dependency-notation-including-the-index-url/5659/21

- What about `PEP 708 <https://peps.python.org/pep-0708>`__? Isn’t that
  enough?

  PEP 708 is aimed specifically at addressing dependency confusion
  attacks, and doesn’t address the potential for implementation variants
  among indexes. It is a way of filtering external URLs and encoding an
  allow-list for external indexes in index metadata. It does not change
  the lack of priority or preference among channels that currently
  exists.

- `Namespacing <https://discuss.python.org/t/dependency-notation-including-the-index-url/5659>`__

  Namespacing is a means of specifying a package such that the Python
  usage of the package does not change, but the package installation
  restricts where the package comes from. `PEP
  752 <https://peps.python.org/pep-0752/>`__ recently proposed a way to
  multiplex a package’s owners in a flat package namespace (e.g. the
  PyPI repo) by reserving prefixes as grouping elements. `NPM’s concept
  of “scopes” <https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v10/using-npm/scope>`__ has
  been raised as another good example of how this might look. This PEP
  differs in that it is targeted to multiple repos, not a flat package
  namespace. The net effect is roughly the same in terms of predictably
  choosing a particular package source, except that the namespacing
  approach relies more on naming packages with these namespace prefixes,
  whereas this PEP would be less granular, pulling in packages on
  whatever higher-priority index the user specifies. The namespacing
  approach relies on all configured indexes treating a given namespace
  similarly, which leaves the usual concern that not all configured
  indexes are trusted equally. The namespace idea is not incompatible
  with this PEP, but it also does not improve expression of trust of
  indexes in the way that this PEP does.

Open Issues
===========

[Any points that are still being decided/discussed.]

Acknowledgements
================

This work was supported financially by NVIDIA through employment of the author.
NVIDIA teammates dramatically improved this PEP in its early state with their
input.  Astral pioneered the behaviors of index priority and layed the
foundation of this document. The Pip authors deserve great praise for their
consistent direction and patient communication of the version priority behavior,
especially in the face of contentious security concerns.

Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
