PEP: 835
Title: Shorthand syntax for Annotated type metadata
Author: Till Varoquaux <till.varoquaux@gmail.com>
Sponsor: Ivan Levkivskyi <levkivskyi@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-835-shorthand-syntax-for-annotated-type-metadata/107814
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Typing
Created: 12-Jun-2026
Python-Version: 3.16
Post-History: `19-Apr-2026 <https://discuss.python.org/t/shorthand-syntax-for-annotated-type-metadata/106888>`__,
              `18-Jun-2026 <https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-835-shorthand-syntax-for-annotated-type-metadata/107814>`__,

Abstract
========

This proposal introduces a shorthand syntax for ``typing.Annotated`` using the
``@`` operator. This change reduces verbosity for type annotations with
metadata, benefiting libraries like Pydantic, FastAPI, Typer, and
SQLModel.

Motivation
==========

Since its introduction in :pep:`593`, ``Annotated`` has become the standard
mechanism for attaching context-specific metadata to types. It is widely
embraced by libraries such as Pydantic, FastAPI, and SQLModel.
Historically, these libraries embedded metadata within default values, a pattern
that was concise but problematic for type checkers and runtime defaults:

.. code-block::
   :class: bad

    # The older, now discouraged pattern
    class User(BaseModel):
        id: int = Field(gt=0)
        name: str = Field(min_length=3)

The transition to ``Annotated`` cleanly separated types from metadata but
introduced visual noise and cognitive overhead. Library authors often surface
"special" types, like ``PositiveInt`` or ``EmailStr``, to hide this verbosity.
These aliases are discoverable but inherently limited. Users needing unique
constraint combinations must fall back to the full ``Annotated`` syntax::

    from typing import Annotated
    from pydantic import BaseModel, Field, PositiveInt

    class User(BaseModel):
        # Concise but limited
        age: PositiveInt

        # Verbose fallback required for specific constraints
        id: Annotated[int, Field(gt=0, le=1000)]
        name: Annotated[str, Field(min_length=3, max_length=50)] = "Anonymous"

This creates a jarring experience. ``Annotated`` is core to the ecosystem but
remains "hidden" and difficult to use directly. The proposed shorthand bridges
this ergonomic gap. It restores the conciseness of earlier patterns while
adhering to the modern ``Annotated`` standard. By reducing overhead, this
proposal encourages developers to leverage the full power of type metadata:

.. code-block:: python
   :class: good

    from pydantic import BaseModel, Field
    from fastapi import Query

    class User(BaseModel):
        id: int @ Field(gt=0, le=1000)
        name: str @ Field(min_length=3, max_length=50) = "Anonymous"
        age: int @ Field(gt=0)
        email: str @ Field(pattern=r".*@.*")

    async def read_items(q: (str | None) @ Query(max_length=50) = None):
        ...

Rationale
=========

Developer Ergonomics and Ecosystem Alignment
---------------------------------------------

Pydantic and FastAPI now recommend ``Annotated`` over embedding metadata in
default values. However, the resulting code is significantly more verbose.
This proposal restores the earlier pattern's conciseness while adhering to the
modern ``Annotated`` standard.

Sebastián Ramírez (author of FastAPI, Typer, and SQLModel) noted that a shorter
syntax without extra imports would benefit users. By making the "correct" way
the most ergonomic, we reduce the incentive for discouraged patterns.

This ergonomic barrier was notably evident in the withdrawal of :pep:`727`
(Documentation Metadata). The extreme verbosity of the syntax in function
signatures was a primary factor in its community pushback. A native shorthand
makes such metadata-heavy standards significantly more viable.

Conceptual Consistency and Precedent
-------------------------------------

The ``@`` operator signifies "decoration" or "attachment of metadata" for
functions and classes. Extending this to type expressions leverages that
mental model: just as a decorator attaches behavior to a function, the ``@``
operator attaches metadata to a type.

This follows the precedent set by :pep:`604` (``|`` for ``Union``) and
:pep:`585` (generics in built-ins). These PEPs moved common typing constructs
into native operators, making the type system feel like a first-class part of
the language.

This syntax also draws inspiration from other languages with strong metadata
ecosystems, notably Java. In Java (formalized in `JSR 308 <https://jcp.org/en/jsr/detail?id=308>`__)
and other JVM languages, the ``@`` symbol is standard for type annotations:

.. code-block:: java

    public class Person {
        @Column(length = 32)
        private String name;
    }

While the exact syntax differs (Python's ``@`` operates inline on the type
expression rather than decorating the declaration), the visual association
between the ``@`` symbol and type-level metadata will be familiar to many
developers.

Implementation and Performance
-------------------------------

Making the syntax built-in eases runtime metadata use by removing ``typing``
module import overhead. This aligns with the trend toward accessible runtime
type introspection.

The proposed syntax is straightforward to implement. Prototypes for Mypy,
Pyright, and Ruff are compact. Since ``@`` is already a valid expression
operator, these tools do not require parser changes. They handle the new syntax
during semantic analysis. Ruff has already prototyped a ``pyupgrade`` rule
for automated conversion. This enables large codebases to
migrate to the new syntax with minimal manual effort.

CPython prototype testing confirms that libraries like ``typer`` and
``pydantic`` work out of the box.

Specification
=============

The proposed syntax uses the ``@`` (matrix multiplication) operator to attach
metadata to a type::

    # Current syntax
    x: Annotated[int, Range(0, 10)]

    # Proposed shorthand
    x: int @ Range(0, 10)

Operator Precedence
-------------------

The ``@`` operator has higher precedence than the ``|`` operator (bitwise OR,
used for Unions in :pep:`604`). Parentheses are required when attaching
metadata to a Union type:

- ``int | str @ Metadata`` is equivalent to ``int | Annotated[str, Metadata]``
- ``(int | str) @ Metadata`` is equivalent to ``Annotated[int | str, Metadata]``

This matches the standard precedence of ``@`` and ``|`` in Python expressions.
The most common union pattern, ``Optional``, works naturally:

- ``int @ Field(gt=0) | None`` is equivalent to
  ``Annotated[int, Field(gt=0)] | None``

Flattening and Associativity
----------------------------

The ``@`` operator is left-associative. When multiple metadata items are
chained, the resulting ``Annotated`` object is flattened.

Specifically, ``T @ m1 @ m2`` is strictly equivalent to
``Annotated[T, m1, m2]``. It must not resolve to a nested structure such as
``Annotated[Annotated[T, m1], m2]``. This mirrors the existing runtime
behavior of ``typing.Annotated``.

This flattening also applies when the left-hand operand is an existing
``Annotated`` type, regardless of how it was constructed::

    Annotated[int, m1] @ m2  # AnnotatedType(int, m1, m2) — flattened

Runtime Behavior
----------------

The ``@`` operator produces a ``types.AnnotatedType`` instance, a new built-in
type implemented in C. The existing ``typing.Annotated`` is unified with this
type: ``typing.Annotated[X, Y]`` returns the same ``types.AnnotatedType``
object as ``X @ Y``:

.. code-block:: pycon

    >>> type(int @ Field()) is type(Annotated[int, Field()])
    True
    >>> typing.Annotated is types.AnnotatedType
    True

An ``AnnotatedType`` object exposes the following attributes:

- ``__origin__``: The base type (e.g., ``int``).
- ``__metadata__``: A tuple of metadata items.
- ``__args__``: The tuple ``(origin, *metadata)``, for compatibility with
  ``typing.get_args()``.
- ``__parameters__``: Lazily computed type variables contained in the type.

The ``repr()`` of an ``AnnotatedType`` uses the shorthand syntax:

.. code-block:: pycon

    >>> int @ Field(gt=0)
    int @ Field(gt=0)

``AnnotatedType`` objects support pickling via ``copyreg``, reconstructing
through ``AnnotatedType[origin, *metadata]``.

``None`` on the left-hand side is accepted and uses ``None`` as the
origin:

.. code-block:: pycon

    >>> None @ Field()
    None @ Field()

Supported Left-Hand Operands
-----------------------------

The ``@`` operator is implemented by adding ``nb_matrix_multiply`` to the
metatype (``type``) and to several typing-related types. The operator is
supported for any left-hand operand that currently supports the ``|``
operator for making a union.

For all other left-hand operands, the operator returns ``NotImplemented``,
allowing normal ``__matmul__`` dispatch to proceed.

Parsing and Grammar
===================

This proposal requires no changes to the Python grammar. Because ``@`` is
already a valid operator, it is natively parsed as a binary operation. The
shorthand is resolved during semantic analysis, entirely bypassing the need
to patch grammar files or update the parser.

How to Teach This
=================

In Python, the ``@`` symbol already has an established association with
metadata through decorators. The annotation shorthand extends this
intuition to the type system: ``int @ Field(gt=0)`` reads as "``int``,
decorated with ``Field(gt=0)``."

For beginners, the key rule is simple: **in a type annotation, ``@`` means
"with this metadata."** The full ``Annotated[int, Field(gt=0)]`` syntax
remains available and is entirely equivalent for those who find it clearer.

For experienced developers, the precedence rules follow standard Python
operator precedence (``@`` binds tighter than ``|``), and chaining
``T @ m1 @ m2`` flattens exactly as nested ``Annotated`` does.

Documentation and teaching materials should introduce the shorthand alongside
``Annotated``, not as a replacement. The longhand form is still preferred in
contexts where multiple metadata items are passed as a group and chaining
would be unwieldy.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Forward References and Deferred Evaluation
-------------------------------------------

Under :pep:`749`, annotations are lazily evaluated. The ``annotationlib``
module provides several formats for retrieving annotations:

- ``Format.VALUE``: Fully evaluates the annotation. Raises ``NameError``
  if any name is unresolvable.
- ``Format.FORWARDREF``: Wraps unresolvable names in ``ForwardRef`` objects.
  However, compound expressions using operators (``@``, ``|``) produce an
  opaque ``ForwardRef`` string containing the entire expression.
- ``Format.STRING``: Returns the raw source text with no evaluation.

For the ``@`` operator, ``Format.FORWARDREF`` is insufficient. Consider::

    class Model:
        ref: "NotYetDefined" @ Field(gt=0)

Under ``Format.FORWARDREF``, this produces
``ForwardRef('"NotYetDefined" @ Field(gt=0)')``. The metadata ``Field(gt=0)``
is trapped inside the unresolved string and cannot be inspected until the
forward reference is resolved. This is a blocking issue for libraries like
Pydantic and FastAPI, which inspect metadata at class-definition time.

This proposal introduces a new format, ``Format.FORWARDREF_STRUCTURAL``.
This format assumes typing semantics and evaluates compound type expressions
**structurally**. It always returns an ``AnnotatedType`` for ``@``, a union
for ``|``, and a ``GenericAlias`` for subscripting. When a name cannot be
resolved, only that name is wrapped in ``ForwardRef``; the surrounding
operators are still evaluated. The example above produces::

    AnnotatedType(ForwardRef('NotYetDefined'), Field(gt=0))

The metadata is immediately accessible. This format also resolves the
pre-existing issue with ``|`` unions, where ``"Foo" | int`` under
``Format.FORWARDREF`` produces ``ForwardRef('Foo | int')`` instead of the
structural ``ForwardRef('Foo') | int``.

Interaction with PEP 563
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Under :pep:`563` (``from __future__ import annotations``), all annotations
are stored as source-code strings and evaluated via ``eval()`` on access. The
``@`` shorthand works correctly in this context: ``eval("int @ Field(gt=0)")``
triggers the metatype's ``nb_matrix_multiply`` and produces an
``AnnotatedType``.

However, ``FORWARDREF_STRUCTURAL`` reconstruction from PEP 563 strings is
coarser than from :pep:`749` thunks. When a name is unresolvable, the
``ForwardRef`` may wrap a call expression (e.g., ``ForwardRef('Field(gt=0)')``)
rather than just a name. :pep:`749` provides a strictly better experience and
is the recommended path forward.

Operator Overloading
--------------------

The ``@`` operator is currently used for matrix multiplication
(``__matmul__``). The shorthand is implemented by adding
``nb_matrix_multiply`` to the metatype (``type``), so it applies when a
**type object** (class) appears on the left-hand side — not when an instance
does.

This means ``int @ Field()`` produces an ``AnnotatedType``, while
``42 @ something`` is unaffected and follows normal ``__matmul__`` dispatch.
Crucially, ``ndarray @ Field()`` (using the **class** as a type annotation)
also produces an ``AnnotatedType``, even though ndarray *instances* define
``__matmul__`` for matrix multiplication. This is the desired behavior: applying the
``@`` operator to a class object evaluates as type metadata; applying it to
an instance performs arithmetic.

The only case where the shorthand does not apply is when a class has a
**metaclass** that defines ``__matmul__``. In that case, the metaclass's
operator takes priority via standard Python MRO dispatch. This is an obscure
edge case unlikely to arise in practice.

typing.Annotated Migration
---------------------------

This proposal replaces the pure-Python ``typing._AnnotatedAlias`` class with
a native C implementation (``types.AnnotatedType``). ``typing.Annotated``
becomes a reference to this C type rather than a special form with a custom
metaclass.

The private ``typing._AnnotatedAlias`` class is retained as a deprecated
compatibility shim. Code using ``isinstance(x, typing._AnnotatedAlias)``
will continue to work but emit a ``DeprecationWarning``. The shim is
scheduled for removal in Python 3.18.

Code that should be updated:

- ``type(ann).__name__ == '_AnnotatedAlias'`` → use
  ``isinstance(ann, types.AnnotatedType)`` or
  ``typing.get_origin(ann) is Annotated``
- ``typing._AnnotatedAlias(origin, metadata)`` → use
  ``Annotated[origin, *metadata]`` or ``origin @ m1 @ m2``

Backporting via typing_extensions
----------------------------------

Unlike ``X | Y`` (which could be backported by ``typing_extensions`` using
``__or__``), the ``@`` shorthand requires changes to the metatype
(``type.__matmul__``), which cannot be patched from pure Python. The
shorthand is therefore only available on Python 3.16+. The existing
``Annotated[X, Y]`` syntax continues to work on all supported versions and
should be used when backwards compatibility is required.

Rejected Ideas
==============

Mandatory List Variant
----------------------

The syntax ``Type @ [ann1, ann2]`` was considered to group metadata and avoid
chaining ambiguities. While clearer in some contexts, it was deprioritized in
favor of the cleaner ``Type @ ann1 @ ann2``.

List-based syntax
-----------------

An alternative syntax using list literals, such as ``[int, Metadata]``, was
rejected due to runtime semantics. In Python, a list literal evaluates to a
mutable ``list`` instance. Allowing lists as type annotations would break the
assumption of runtime checkers (like Pydantic) that annotations evaluate to
valid type constructs or ``GenericAlias`` objects, not arbitrary data
structures.

Scientific Computing Conflict
-----------------------------

Critics note that ``ndarray @ Metadata`` visually resembles matrix
multiplication on a type whose instances are heavily associated with that
operation. However, the ``@``
operator distinguishes between **type objects** and **instances**: ``ndarray``
(the class) appearing in a type annotation is a type object, and ``@``
produces an ``AnnotatedType``. An ``ndarray`` instance appearing in an
expression still uses NumPy's ``__matmul__`` for matrix multiplication.

Since type annotations and arithmetic expressions occupy distinct syntactic
positions, this is a visual concern rather than a runtime conflict.

Divergence from Type Theory
---------------------------

Unlike ``Union`` or ``Generics``, using an operator for metadata is a
Python-specific ergonomic choice rather than a standard type-theoretic
construct. This follows the pragmatic precedent of :pep:`604`.

Usage Examples
==============

Pydantic Validation
-------------------

The shorthand excels in data validation scenarios::

    from pydantic import BaseModel, Field, HttpUrl
    from annotated_types import Len

    class Project(BaseModel):
        name: str @ Field(title="Project Name") @ Len(1)
        url: HttpUrl @ Field(description="The project homepage")
        stars: int @ Field(ge=0) = 0

FastAPI Dependency Injection
----------------------------

In FastAPI, the shorthand simplifies complex parameter definitions::

    from fastapi import FastAPI, Header, Depends

    app = FastAPI()

    @app.get("/secure")
    async def secure_endpoint(token: str @ Header(description="Authentication token")):
        return {"status": "authorized"}

SQLModel and Database Definitions
---------------------------------

SQLModel relies heavily on ``Annotated`` to define column properties. The
shorthand syntax makes these definitions significantly cleaner::

    from sqlmodel import SQLModel, Field

    class Hero(SQLModel, table=True):
        id: (int | None) @ Field(primary_key=True) = None
        name: str @ Field(index=True)
        secret_name: str
        age: (int | None) @ Field(index=True) = None

Reference Implementation
========================

Prototype implementations are available for the following tools:

- **CPython:** `CPython at-type-annot <https://github.com/till-varoquaux/cpython/compare/main...feature/at-type-annot>`_
- **CPython (with annotation-lib structural forward references):** `CPython forward-stringifier <https://github.com/till-varoquaux/cpython/compare/feature/at-type-annot...feature/forward-stringifier>`_
- **Mypy:** `Mypy at-type-annot <https://github.com/till-varoquaux/mypy/compare/master...feature/at-type-annot>`_
- **Mypyc/ast_serialize:** `ast_serialize at-type-annot <https://github.com/till-varoquaux/ast_serialize/compare/main...feature/at-type-annot>`_
- **Pyright:** `Pyright at-type-annot <https://github.com/till-varoquaux/pyright/compare/main...feature/at-type-annot>`_
- **Ruff:** `Ruff at-type-annot <https://github.com/till-varoquaux/ruff/compare/main...till-varoquaux:ruff:feature/at-type-annot>`_

References
==========

- `Discussion on Python Discourse <https://discuss.python.org/t/shorthand-syntax-for-annotated-type-metadata/106888>`_
- :pep:`563` -- Postponed evaluation of annotations
- :pep:`585` -- Type hinting generics in standard collections
- :pep:`593` -- Flexible function and variable annotations
- :pep:`604` -- Allow writing union types as ``X | Y``
- :pep:`727` -- Documentation metadata in typing (Withdrawn)
- :pep:`749` -- Implementing PEP 649

Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
