PEP: 828
Title: Supporting 'yield from' in asynchronous generators
Author: Peter Bierma <peter@python.org>
PEP-Delegate: Yury Selivanov <yury@vercel.com>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/106459
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Created: 07-Mar-2026
Python-Version: 3.16
Post-History: `07-Mar-2026 <https://discuss.python.org/t/106430>`__,
              `09-Mar-2026 <https://discuss.python.org/t/106459>`__


Abstract
========

This PEP introduces support for :keyword:`yield from <yield>` in an
:ref:`asynchronous generator function <asynchronous-generator-functions>`
through a new ``async yield from`` construct:

.. code-block:: python

    async def agenerator():
        yield 1
        yield 2
        return 3

    async def main():
        result = async yield from agenerator()
        assert result == 3


Terminology
===========

This PEP refers to an ``async def`` function that contains a ``yield``
as an :term:`asynchronous generator`, sometimes suffixed with "function".
This is not to be confused with an :term:`asynchronous generator iterator`,
which is the object *returned* by an asynchronous generator.

This PEP also uses the term "subgenerator" to refer to a generator, synchronous
or asynchronous, that is used inside of a ``yield from`` or ``async yield from``
expression.


Motivation
==========


Implementation complexity has gone down
---------------------------------------

Historically, ``yield from`` was not added to asynchronous generators due to
concerns about the complexity of the implementation. To quote :pep:`525`:

    While it is theoretically possible to implement ``yield from`` support for
    asynchronous generators, it would require a serious redesign of the
    generators implementation.

As of March 2026, the author of this proposal does not believe this to be true
given the current state of CPython's asynchronous generator implementation.
This proposal comes with a reference implementation to argue this point, but
it is acknowledged that complexity is often subjective.


Symmetry with synchronous generators
------------------------------------

``yield from`` was added to synchronous generators in :pep:`380` because
delegation to another generator is a useful thing to do. Due to the
aforementioned complexity in CPython's generator implementation, PEP 525
omitted support for ``yield from`` in asynchronous generators, but this has
left a gap in the language.

This gap has not gone unnoticed by users. There have been three separate
requests for ``yield from`` or ``return`` behavior (which are closely related)
in asynchronous generators:

1. https://discuss.python.org/t/8897
2. https://discuss.python.org/t/47050
3. https://discuss.python.org/t/66886

Additionally, users have `questioned <https://stackoverflow.com/questions/47376408>`__
this design decision on Stack Overflow.


Subgenerator delegation is useful for asynchronous generators
-------------------------------------------------------------

The current workaround for the lack of ``yield from`` support in asynchronous
generators is to use a ``for``/``async for`` loop that manually yields each
item. This comes with a few drawbacks:

1. It obscures the intent of the code and increases the amount of effort
   necessary to work with asynchronous generators, because each delegation
   point becomes a loop. This damages the power of asynchronous generators.
2. :meth:`~agen.asend`, :meth:`~agen.athrow`, and :meth:`~agen.aclose`
   do not interact properly with the caller. This is the primary reason that
   ``yield from`` was added in the first place.
3. Return values are not natively supported with asynchronous generators. The
   workaround for this is to raise an exception, which increases boilerplate.


Specification
=============


Syntax
------


Compiler changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The compiler will no longer emit a :exc:`SyntaxError` for
:keyword:`return` statements inside asynchronous generators.


Grammar changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``yield_expr`` and ``simple_stmt`` rules need to be updated for the new
``async yield from`` syntax:

.. code-block:: peg

    yield_expr[expr_ty]:
        | 'async' 'yield' 'from' a=expression

    simple_stmt[stmt_ty] (memo):
        | &('yield' | 'async') yield_stmt


Changes to ``StopAsyncIteration``
---------------------------------

The :class:`StopAsyncIteration` exception will gain a new ``value`` attribute
to be used as the result of ``async yield from`` expressions.

This attribute can be supplied by passing a positional argument to
``StopAsyncIteration``. For example:

.. code-block:: pycon

   >>> exception = StopAsyncIteration(42)
   >>> exception.value
   42


If no argument is supplied, ``value`` will be ``None``.


``return`` statements inside asynchronous generators
----------------------------------------------------

In the body of an asynchronous generator function, the statement
``return expression`` is roughly equivalent to
``raise StopAsyncIteration(expression)``. However, similar to implicit
``StopIteration`` exceptions raised inside of synchronous generators,
the exception cannot be caught in the body of the asynchronous generator.


``async yield from`` semantics
------------------------------

The statement

.. code-block:: python

   RESULT = async yield from EXPR

is roughly equivalent to the following:

.. code-block:: python

    aiterator = aiter(EXPR)
    try:
        item = await anext(aiterator)
    except StopAsyncIteration as stop:
        RESULT = stop.value
    else:
        while True:
            try:
                received = yield item
            except GeneratorExit as gen_exit:
                try:
                    aclose = aiterator.aclose
                except AttributeError:
                    pass
                else:
                    await aclose()
                raise gen_exit
            except BaseException as exception:
                try:
                    athrow = aiterator.athrow
                except AttributeError:
                    raise exception from None
                else:
                    try:
                        item = await athrow(exception)
                    except StopAsyncIteration as stop:
                        RESULT = stop.value
                        break
            else:
                try:
                    if received is None:
                        item = await anext(aiterator)
                    else:
                        item = await aiterator.asend(received)
                except StopAsyncIteration as stop:
                    RESULT = stop.value
                    break


Rationale
=========


Relation to ``yield from``
--------------------------

This PEP aims to be very similar to the semantics of ``yield from``, with the
exception that asynchronous generator methods are used instead of synchronous
generator methods when delegating. This is a very intuitive design and furthers
symmetry with synchronous generators.


Choice of ``async yield from`` as the syntax
--------------------------------------------

This PEP uses ``async yield from`` as the syntax to ensure that the behavior
of the syntax is immediately clear to the user.

However, it is acknowledged that this is somewhat verbose. There is not any
great solution to this problem; see :ref:`pep-828-rejected-ideas` for
discussion about proposed alternatives. In short, ``async yield from`` was
chosen as the best choice of syntax because, while verbose, it is very clear
and readable.


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

This PEP introduces a backwards-compatible syntax change.

The addition of the ``value`` attribute to :exc:`StopAsyncIteration` is a
minor semantic change to an existing builtin exception, but is unlikely
to affect existing code in practice, as it mirrors the existing ``value``
attribute on :exc:`StopIteration` and does not affect any other behavior
on ``StopAsyncIteration`` or the asynchronous iterator protocol.


Security Implications
=====================

This PEP has no known security implications.


How to Teach This
=================

The details of this proposal will be located in Python's canonical
documentation, as with all other language constructs. However, this PEP
intends to be very intuitive; users should be able to naturally reach
for ``async yield from`` given their own background knowledge about generators
in Python. This can be encouraged further by suggesting
``async yield from`` in the error message when a user attempts to use
``yield from`` in an asynchronous generator.


Reference Implementation
========================

A reference implementation of this PEP can be found at
`python/cpython#145716 <https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/145716>`__.


.. _pep-828-rejected-ideas:

Rejected Ideas
==============


Using ``yield from`` to delegate to asynchronous generators
-----------------------------------------------------------

Due to the verbosity of ``async yield from``, it was proposed to overload
the existing ``yield from`` syntax to perform asynchronous subgenerator
delegation when used inside of an asynchronous generator.

For example:

.. code-block:: python

    async def asubgenerator():
        yield 1
        yield 2

    async def agenerator():
        yield from asubgenerator()


This has the benefit of being more concise than ``async yield from``, but also
has a few downsides.

Most importantly, this makes the asynchronous context switches necessary for
delegation implicit, which has no precedent in Python; all syntax that may
execute an ``await`` is prefixed with ``async``. It has been argued that one
of the upsides of ``async``/``await`` over threads is the explicit switch
points, so hiding ``await``\ s behind a ``yield from`` hurts this benefit.

Second, many were uncomfortable with ``yield from`` being context-dependent.
It felt like a potential footgun for ``yield from`` to mean something
different based on the type of generator it was used in. In practice, this
may come up in a scenario where one wants to convert a synchronous generator
into an asynchronous generator.

For example, imagine a developer is writing a function for streaming data
to the caller:

.. code-block:: python

    def stream_data():
        yield ...
        yield from something_else()
        yield ...

Now, imagine that the developer wants to add an ``await`` call somewhere in
this function; the ``yield from something_else()`` statement would suddenly
become a runtime :class:`TypeError` (as opposed to a compile-time
:class:`SyntaxError`). With the current proposal, the existence of
``async yield from`` (which would ideally be included in the error message)
would make it much clearer that ``something_else`` must also be asynchronous
in order to delegate to it.

Finally, this would preclude the introduction of support for synchronous
subgenerator delegation inside asynchronous generators (see
:ref:`pep-828-synchronous-delegation`), because the ``yield from``
syntax would already be overloaded. However, the author of this proposal
does acknowledge that the issues with synchronous subdelegation may preclude
the introduction of this anyway -- it is not entirely clear whether the issues
are solvable given time.


``async from``, ``await from``, and similar spellings
-----------------------------------------------------

As an alternate solution to the verbosity of ``async yield from``, some have
suggested using spellings such as ``async from`` in order to cut down on the
verbosity. Unfortunately, changes in the spelling will likely hurt the
readability of the syntax as a whole.

The benefit of ``async yield from`` is that it specifies each of the three
important parts without introducing new keywords. In particular:

1. ``async`` is necessary to imply an asynchronous context switch.
2. ``yield`` is necessary to indicate that the generator will be suspended.
3. ``from`` is necessary to differentiate between "standard" generator
   suspension (a ``yield`` statement) and subgenerator delegation.

Given these three constraints, it seems unlikely that a more concise spelling
exists.


.. _pep-828-synchronous-delegation:

Allowing delegation to synchronous subgenerators
------------------------------------------------

In an earlier revision of this proposal, the synchronous ``yield from``
construct was allowed in an asynchronous generator, which would delegate to a
synchronous generator from an asynchronous one. This had a number of hidden
issues.

In particular, the mixing of asynchronous frames with synchronous frames had a
layer of complexity unfit for Python. In the implementation, there would have
to be a hidden translation layer between synchronous generator methods and
asynchronous generator methods: :meth:`~agen.asend` to :meth:`~generator.send`,
:meth:`~agen.athrow` to :meth:`~generator.throw`, and :meth:`~agen.aclose`
to :meth:`~generator.close`.

For example, asynchronous exceptions could be injected into synchronous
generators:

.. code-block:: python

    async def agen():
        async with asyncio.timeout(3):
            # If the timeout fails, then an asyncio.TimeoutError would be raised
            # in a *synchronous* generator!
            yield from subgen()


To quote Brandt Bucher (paraphrased):

    At that point, why not just allow synchronous functions to await coroutines?


In addition, there seemed to be much less demand for this feature compared to
support for asynchronous delegation, so solving these issues is less of a
priority for now.


Acknowledgements
================

Thanks to Bartosz Sławecki for aiding in the development of the reference
implementation of this PEP. In addition, the :exc:`StopAsyncIteration`
changes alongside the support for non-``None`` return values inside
asynchronous generators were largely based on Alex Dixon's design from
`python/cpython#125401 <https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/125401>`__.

Special thanks to Yury Selivanov for providing extensive feedback and also
collecting outside opinions about the design and implementation.


Change History
==============

- 26-May-2026

    - Removed support for delegating to a synchronous subgenerator (via
      a plain ``yield from``).


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
