PEP: 788
Title: Interpreter References
Author: Peter Bierma <zintensitydev@gmail.com>
Sponsor: Victor Stinner <vstinner@python.org>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/93653
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Created: 23-Apr-2025
Python-Version: 3.15
Post-History: `10-Mar-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/83959>`__,
              `27-Apr-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/89863>`__,
              `28-May-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/93653>`__,


Abstract
========

In the C API, threads are able to interact with an interpreter by holding an
:term:`attached thread state` for the current thread. This works well, but
can get complicated when it comes to creating and attaching
:term:`thread states <thread state>` in a thread-safe manner.

Specifically, the C API doesn't have any way to ensure that an interpreter
is in a state where it can be called when creating and/or attaching a thread
state. As such, attachment might hang the thread, or it might flat-out crash
due to the interpreter's structure being deallocated in subinterpreters.
This can be a frustrating issue to deal with in large applications that
want to execute Python code alongside some other native code.

In addition, assumptions about which interpreter to use tend to be wrong
inside of subinterpreters, primarily because :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`
always creates a thread state for the main interpreter in threads where
Python hasn't ever run.

This PEP intends to solve these kinds issues through the introduction of
interpreter references that prevent an interpreter from finalizing (or more
technically, entering a stage in which attachment of a thread state hangs).
This allows for more structure and reliability when it comes to thread state
management, because it forces a layer of synchronization between the
interpreter and the caller.

With this new system, there are a lot of changes needed in CPython and
third-party libraries to adopt it. For example, in APIs that don't require
the caller to hold an attached thread state, a strong interpreter reference
should be passed to ensure that it targets the correct interpreter, and that
the interpreter doesn't concurrently deallocate itself. The best example of
this in CPython is :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`. As part of this proposal,
:c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure` is provided as a modern replacement that
takes a strong interpreter reference.

Motivation
==========

Non-Python Threads Always Hang During Finalization
--------------------------------------------------

Many large libraries might need to call Python code in highly-asynchronous
situations where the desired interpreter
(:ref:`typically the main interpreter <pep-788-subinterpreters-gilstate>`)
could be finalizing or deleted, but want to continue running code after
invoking the interpreter. This desire has been
`brought up by users <https://discuss.python.org/t/78850/>`_.
For example, a callback that wants to call Python code might be invoked when:

- A kernel has finished running on a GPU.
- A network packet was received.
- A thread has quit, and a native library is executing static finalizers of
  thread local storage.

Generally, this pattern would look something like this:

.. code-block:: c

    static void
    some_callback(void *closure)
    {
        /* Do some work */
        /* ... */

        PyGILState_STATE gstate = PyGILState_Ensure();
        /* Invoke the C API to do some computation */
        PyGILState_Release(gstate);

        /* ... */
    }

In the current C API, any non-Python thread (one not created via the
:mod:`threading` module) is considered to be "daemon", meaning that the interpreter
won't wait on that thread before shutting down. Instead, the interpreter will hang the
thread when it goes to :term:`attach <attached thread state>` a :term:`thread state`,
making the thread unusable past that point. Attaching a thread state can happen at
any point when invoking Python, such as in-between bytecode instructions
(to yield the :term:`GIL` to a different thread), or when a C function exits a
:c:macro:`Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS` block, so simply guarding against whether the
interpreter is finalizing isn't enough to safely call Python code. (Note that hanging
the thread is relatively new behavior; in prior versions, the thread would exit,
but the issue is the same.)

This means that any non-Python thread may be terminated at any point, which
is severely limiting for users who want to do more than just execute Python
code in their stream of calls.

``Py_IsFinalizing`` is Insufficient
***********************************

The :ref:`docs <python:gilstate>`
currently recommend :c:func:`Py_IsFinalizing` to guard against termination of
the thread:

    Calling this function from a thread when the runtime is finalizing will
    terminate the thread, even if the thread was not created by Python. You
    can use ``Py_IsFinalizing()`` or ``sys.is_finalizing()`` to check if the
    interpreter is in process of being finalized before calling this function
    to avoid unwanted termination.

Unfortunately, this isn't correct, because of time-of-call to time-of-use
issues; the interpreter might not be finalizing during the call to
:c:func:`Py_IsFinalizing`, but it might start finalizing immediately
afterwards, which would cause the attachment of a thread state to hang the
thread.

Daemon Threads Can Break Finalization
*************************************

When acquiring locks, it's extremely important to detach the thread state to
prevent deadlocks. This is true on both the with-GIL and free-threaded builds.

When the GIL is enabled, a deadlock can occur pretty easily when acquiring a
lock if the GIL wasn't released; thread A grabs a lock, and starts waiting on
its thread state to attach, while thread B holds the GIL and is waiting on the
lock. A similar deadlock can occur on the free-threaded build during stop-the-world
pauses when running the garbage collector.

This affects CPython itself, and there's not much that can be done
to fix it with the current API. For example,
`python/cpython#129536 <https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/129536>`_
remarks that the :mod:`ssl` module can emit a fatal error when used at
finalization, because a daemon thread got hung while holding the lock
for :data:`sys.stderr`, and then a finalizer tried to write to it.
Ideally, a thread should be able to temporarily prevent the interpreter
from hanging it while it holds the lock.

However, it's generally unsafe to acquire Python locks (for example,
:class:`threading.Lock`) in finalizers, because the garbage collector
might run while the lock is held, which would deadlock if another finalizer
tried to acquire the lock. This does not apply to many C locks, such as with
:data:`sys.stderr`, because Python code cannot be run while the lock is held.
This PEP intends to fix this problem for C locks, not Python locks.

Daemon Threads are not the Problem
**********************************

Prior to this PEP, deprecating daemon threads was discussed
`extensively <https://discuss.python.org/t/68836>`_. Daemon threads technically
cause many of the issues outlined in this proposal, so removing daemon threads
could be seen as a potential solution. The main argument for removing daemon
threads is that they're a large cause of problems in the interpreter
`[1] <https://discuss.python.org/t/68836/6>`_.

    Except that daemon threads don’t actually work reliably. They’re attempting
    to run and use Python interpreter resources after the runtime has been shut
    down upon runtime finalization. As in they have pointers to global state for
    the interpreter.

However, in practice, daemon threads are useful for simplifying many threading
applications in Python, and since the program is about to close in most cases,
it's not worth the added complexity to try and gracefully shut down a thread
`[2] <https://discuss.python.org/t/68836/3>`_.

    When I’ve needed daemon threads, it’s usually been the case of “Long-running,
    uninterruptible, third-party task” in terms of the examples in the linked issue.
    Basically I’ve had something that I need running in the background, but I have
    no easy way to terminate it short of process termination. Unfortunately, I’m on
    Windows, so ``signal.pthread_kill`` isn’t an option. I guess I could use the
    Windows Terminate Thread API, but it’s a lot of work to wrap it myself compared
    to just letting process termination handle things.

Finally, removing Python-level daemon threads does not fix the whole problem.
As noted by this PEP, extension modules are free to create their own threads
and attach thread states for them. Similar to daemon threads, Python doesn't
try and join them during finalization, so trying to remove daemon threads
as a whole would involve trying to remove them from the C API, which would
require a much more massive API change than what is currently being proposed
`[3] <https://discuss.python.org/t/68836/7>`_.

    Realize however that even if we get rid of daemon threads, extension
    module code can and does spawn its own threads that are not tracked by
    Python. ... Those are realistically an alternate form of daemon thread
    ... and those are never going to be forbidden.

Joining the Thread isn't Always a Good Idea
*******************************************

Even in daemon threads, it's generally *possible* to prevent hanging of
non-Python threads through :mod:`atexit` functions.
A thread could be started by some C function, and then as long as
that thread is joined by :mod:`atexit`, then the thread won't hang.

:mod:`atexit` isn't always an option for a function, because to call it, it
needs to already have an :term:`attached thread state` for the thread. If
there's no guarantee of that, then :func:`atexit.register` cannot be safely
called without the risk of hanging the thread. This shifts the contract
of joining the thread to the caller rather than the callee, which again,
isn't reliable enough in practice to be a viable solution.

For example, large C++ applications might want to expose an interface that can
call Python code. To do this, a C++ API would take a Python object, and then
call :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` to safely interact with it (for example, by
calling it). If the interpreter is finalizing or has shut down, then the thread
is hung, disrupting the C++ stream of calls.

.. _pep-788-hanging-compat:

Finalization Behavior for ``PyGILState_Ensure`` Cannot Change
*************************************************************

There will always have to be a point in a Python program where
:c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` can no longer attach a thread state.
If the interpreter is long dead, then Python obviously can't give a
thread a way to invoke it. :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` doesn't have any
meaningful way to return a failure, so it has no choice but to terminate
the thread or emit a fatal error, as noted in
`python/cpython#124622 <https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/124622>`_:

    I think a new GIL acquisition and release C API would be needed. The way
    the existing ones get used in existing C code is not amenible to suddenly
    bolting an error state onto; none of the existing C code is written that
    way. After the call they always just assume they have the GIL and can
    proceed. The API was designed as "it'll block and only return once it has
    the GIL" without any other option.

For this reason, we can't make any real changes to how :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`
works during finalization, because it would break existing code.

The GIL-state APIs are Buggy and Confusing
------------------------------------------

There are currently two public ways for a user to create and attach a
:term:`thread state` for their thread; manual use of :c:func:`PyThreadState_New`
and :c:func:`PyThreadState_Swap`, or the convenient :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`.

The latter, :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`, is significantly more common, having
`nearly 3,000 hits <https://grep.app/search?q=pygilstate_ensure>`_ in a code
search, whereas :c:func:`PyThreadState_New` has
`less than 400 hits <https://grep.app/search?q=PyThreadState_New>`_.

``PyGILState_Ensure`` Generally Crashes During Finalization
***********************************************************

At the time of writing, the current behavior of :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` does not
always match the documentation. Instead of hanging the thread during finalization
as previously noted, it's possible for it to crash with a segmentation
fault. This is a `known issue <https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/124619>`_
that could be fixed in CPython, but it's definitely worth noting
here, because acceptance and implementation of this PEP will likely fix
the existing crashes caused by :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`.

The Term "GIL" is Tricky for Free-threading
*******************************************

A large issue with the term "GIL" in the C API is that it is semantically
misleading. This was noted in `python/cpython#127989
<https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/127989>`_,
created by the authors of this PEP:

    The biggest issue is that for free-threading, there is no GIL, so users
    erroneously call the C API inside ``Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS`` blocks or
    omit ``PyGILState_Ensure`` in fresh threads.

Again, :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` gets an :term:`attached thread state`
for the thread on both with-GIL and free-threaded builds.
An attached thread state is always needed to call the C API, so
:c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` still needs to be called on free-threaded builds,
but with a name like "ensure GIL", it's not immediately clear that that's true.

.. _pep-788-subinterpreters-gilstate:

``PyGILState_Ensure`` Doesn't Guess the Correct Interpreter
-----------------------------------------------------------

As noted in the :ref:`documentation <python:gilstate>`,
the ``PyGILState`` functions aren't officially supported in subinterpreters:

    Note that the ``PyGILState_*`` functions assume there is only one global
    interpreter (created automatically by ``Py_Initialize()``). Python
    supports the creation of additional interpreters (using
    ``Py_NewInterpreter()``), but mixing multiple interpreters and the
    ``PyGILState_*`` API is unsupported.

This is because :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` doesn't have any way
to know which interpreter created the thread, and as such, it has to assume
that it was the main interpreter. There isn't any way to detect this at
runtime, so spurious races are bound to come up in threads created by
subinterpreters, because synchronization for the wrong interpreter will be
used on objects shared between the threads.

For example, if the thread had access to object A, which belongs to a
subinterpreter, but then called :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`, the thread would
have an :term:`attached thread state` pointing to the main interpreter,
not the subinterpreter. This means that any :term:`GIL` assumptions about the
object are wrong! There isn't any synchronization between the two GILs, so both
the thread and the main thread could try to increment the object's reference count
at the same time, causing a data race.

An Interpreter Can Concurrently Deallocate
------------------------------------------

The other way of creating a non-Python thread, :c:func:`PyThreadState_New` and
:c:func:`PyThreadState_Swap`, is a lot better for supporting subinterpreters
(because :c:func:`PyThreadState_New` takes an explicit interpreter, rather than
assuming that the main interpreter was requested), but is still limited by the
current hanging problems in the C API. Manual creation of thread states
("manual" in contrast to the implicit creation of one in
:c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`) does not solve any of the aforementioned
thread-safety issues with thread states.

In addition, subinterpreters typically have a much shorter lifetime than the
main interpreter, so if there was no synchronization between the calling thread
and the created thread, there's a much higher chance that an interpreter-state
passed to a thread will have already finished and have been deallocated,
causing use-after-free crashes. As of writing, this is a relatively
theoretical problem, but it's likely this will become more of an issue
in newer versions with the recent acceptance of :pep:`734`.

Rationale
=========

So, how do we address all of this? The best way seems to be starting from
scratch and "reimagining" how to create, acquire and attach
:term:`thread states <thread state>` in the C API.

Preventing Interpreter Shutdown with Reference Counting
-------------------------------------------------------

This PEP takes an approach where an interpreter is given a reference count
that prevents it from shutting down. So, holding a "strong reference" to the
interpreter will make it safe to call the C API without worrying about the
thread being hung.

This means that interfacing Python (for example, in a C++ library) will need
a reference to the interpreter in order to safely call the object, which is
definitely more inconvenient than assuming the main interpreter is the right
choice, but there's not really another option. A future proposal could perhaps
make this cleaner by adding a tracking mechanism for an object's interpreter
(such as a field on :c:type:`PyObject`).

Generally speaking, a strong interpreter reference should be short-lived. An
interpreter reference should act similar to a lock, or a "critical section",
where the interpreter must not hang the thread or deallocate. For example,
when acquiring an IO lock, a strong interpreter reference should be acquired
before locking, and then released once the lock is released.

Weak References
***************

This proposal also comes with weak references to an interpreter that don't
prevent it from shutting down, but can be promoted to a strong reference when
the user decides that they want to call the C API.  If an interpreter is
destroyed or past the point where it can create strong references, promotion
of a weak reference will fail.

A weak reference will typically live much longer than a strong reference.
This is useful for many of the asynchronous situations stated previously,
where the thread itself shouldn't prevent the desired interpreter from shutting
down, but also allow the thread to execute Python when needed.

For example, a (non-reentrant) event handler may store a weak interpreter
reference in its ``void *arg`` parameter, and then that weak reference will
be promoted to a strong reference when it's time to call Python code.

Removing the outdated GIL-state APIs
------------------------------------

Due to the unfixable issues with ``PyGILState``, this PEP intends to do away
with them entirely. In today's C API, all ``PyGILState`` functions are
replaceable with ``PyThreadState`` counterparts that are compatibile with
subinterpreters:

- :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`: :c:func:`PyThreadState_Swap` & :c:func:`PyThreadState_New`
- :c:func:`PyGILState_Release`: :c:func:`PyThreadState_Clear` & :c:func:`PyThreadState_Delete`
- :c:func:`PyGILState_GetThisThreadState`: :c:func:`PyThreadState_Get` (roughly)
- :c:func:`PyGILState_Check`: ``PyThreadState_GetUnchecked() != NULL``

This PEP specifies a deprecation for these functions (while remaining
in the stable ABI), because :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure` and
:c:func:`PyThreadState_Release` will act as more-correct replacements for
:c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` and :c:func:`PyGILState_Release`, due to the
requirement of a specific interpreter.

The exact details of this deprecation aren't too clear. It's likely that
the usual five-year deprecation (as specificed by :pep:`387`) will be too
short, so for now, these functions will have no specific removal date.

Specification
=============

Interpreter References to Prevent Shutdown
------------------------------------------

An interpreter will keep a reference count that's managed by users of the
C API. When the interpreter starts finalizing, it will wait until its reference
count reaches zero before proceeding to a point where threads will be hung and
it may deallocate its state. The interpreter will wait on its reference count
around the same time when :class:`threading.Thread` objects are joined, but
note that this *is not* the same as joining the thread; the interpreter will
only wait until the reference count is zero, and then proceed.
After the reference count has reached zero, threads can no longer prevent the
interpreter from shutting down (thus :c:func:`PyInterpreterRef_Get` and
:c:func:`PyInterpreterWeakRef_AsStrong` will fail).

A weak reference to an interpreter won't prevent it from finalizing, and can
be safely accessed after the interpreter no longer supports creating strong
references, and even after the interpreter-state has been deleted. Deletion
and duplication of the weak reference will always be allowed, but promotion
(:c:func:`PyInterpreterWeakRef_AsStrong`) will always fail after the
interpreter reaches a point where strong references have been waited on.

Strong Interpreter References
*****************************

.. c:type:: PyInterpreterRef

   An opaque, strong reference to an interpreter.
   The interpreter will wait until a strong reference has been released
   before shutting down.

   This type is guaranteed to be pointer-sized.

.. c:function:: int PyInterpreterRef_Get(PyInterpreterRef *ref)

    Acquire a strong reference to the current interpreter.

    On success, this function returns ``0`` and sets *ref*
    to a strong reference to the interpreter, and returns ``-1``
    with an exception set on failure.

    Failure typically indicates that the interpreter has
    already finished waiting on strong references.

    The caller must hold an :term:`attached thread state`.

.. c:function:: int PyInterpreterRef_Main(PyInterpreterRef *ref)

    Acquire a strong reference to the main interpreter.

    This function only exists for special cases where a specific interpreter
    can't be saved. Prefer safely acquiring a reference through
    :c:func:`PyInterpreterRef_Get` whenever possible.

    On success, this function will return ``0`` and set *ref* to a strong
    reference, and on failure, this function will return ``-1``.

    Failure typically indicates that the main interpreter has already finished
    waiting on its reference count.

    The caller does not need to hold an :term:`attached thread state`.

.. c:function:: PyInterpreterState *PyInterpreterRef_AsInterpreter(PyInterpreterRef ref)

    Return the interpreter denoted by *ref*.

    This function cannot fail, and the caller doesn't need to hold an
    :term:`attached thread state`.

.. c:function:: PyInterpreterRef PyInterpreterRef_Dup(PyInterpreterRef ref)

    Duplicate a strong reference to an interpreter.

    This function cannot fail, and the caller doesn't need to hold an
    :term:`attached thread state`.

.. c:function:: void PyInterpreterRef_Close(PyInterpreterRef ref)

    Release a strong reference to an interpreter, allowing it to shut down
    if there are no references left.

    This function cannot fail, and the caller doesn't need to hold an
    :term:`attached thread state`.

Weak Interpreter References
***************************

.. c:type:: PyInterpreterWeakRef

    An opaque, weak reference to an interpreter.
    The interpreter will *not* wait for the reference to be
    released before shutting down.

    This type is guaranteed to be pointer-sized.

.. c:function:: int PyInterpreterWeakRef_Get(PyInterpreterWeakRef *wref)

    Acquire a weak reference to the current interpreter.

    This function is generally meant to be used in tandem with
    :c:func:`PyInterpreterWeakRef_AsStrong`.

    On success, this function returns ``0`` and sets *wref* to a
    weak reference to the interpreter, and returns ``-1`` with an exception
    set on failure.

    The caller must hold an :term:`attached thread state`.

.. c:function:: PyInterpreterWeakRef PyInterpreterWeakRef_Dup(PyInterpreterWeakRef wref)

    Duplicate a weak reference to an interpreter.

    This function cannot fail, and the caller doesn't need to hold an
    :term:`attached thread state`.

.. c:function:: int PyInterpreterWeakRef_AsStrong(PyInterpreterWeakRef wref, PyInterpreterRef *ref)

    Acquire a strong reference to an interpreter through a weak reference.

    On success, this function returns ``0`` and sets *ref* to a strong
    reference to the interpreter denoted by *wref*.

    If the interpreter no longer exists or has already finished waiting
    for its reference count to reach zero, then this function returns ``-1``
    without an exception set.

    This function is not safe to call in a re-entrant signal handler.

    The caller does not need to hold an :term:`attached thread state`.

.. c:function:: void PyInterpreterWeakRef_Close(PyInterpreterWeakRef wref)

    Release a weak reference to an interpreter.

    This function cannot fail, and the caller doesn't need to hold an
    :term:`attached thread state`.

Ensuring and Releasing Thread States
------------------------------------

This proposal includes two new high-level threading APIs that intend to
replace :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` and :c:func:`PyGILState_Release`.

.. c:type:: PyThreadRef

    An opaque reference to a :c:type:`PyThreadState`.

    As of now, the interpreter will do nothing different for thread references,
    but this may change in the future.

    This type is guaranteed to be pointer-sized.

.. c:function:: int PyThreadState_Ensure(PyInterpreterRef ref, PyThreadRef *thread)

    Ensure that the thread has an :term:`attached thread state` for the
    interpreter denoted by *ref*, and thus can safely invoke that
    interpreter. It is OK to call this function if the thread already has an
    attached thread state, as long as there is a subsequent call to
    :c:func:`PyThreadState_Release` that matches this one.

    Nested calls to this function will only sometimes create a new
    :term:`thread state`. If there is no attached thread state,
    then this function will check for the most recent attached thread
    state used by this thread. If none exists or it doesn't match *ref*,
    a new thread state is created. If it does match *ref*, it is reattached.
    If there is an attached thread state, then a similar check occurs;
    if the interpreter matches *ref*, it is attached, and otherwise a new
    thread state is created.

    The old thread state is stored as a thread reference in *\*thread*, and is
    to be restored by :c:func:`PyThreadState_Release`.

    Return ``0`` on success, and ``-1`` without an exception set on failure.

.. c:function:: void PyThreadState_Release(PyThreadRef ref)

    Release a :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure` call.

    The :term:`attached thread state` prior to the corresponding
    :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure` call is guaranteed to be restored upon
    returning. The cached thread state as used by :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure`
    and :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` will also be restored.

    This function cannot fail.

Deprecation of GIL-state APIs
-----------------------------

This PEP deprecates all of the existing ``PyGILState`` APIs in favor of the
existing and new ``PyThreadState`` APIs. Namely:

- :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`: use :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure` instead.
- :c:func:`PyGILState_Release`: use :c:func:`PyThreadState_Release` instead.
- :c:func:`PyGILState_GetThisThreadState`: use :c:func:`PyThreadState_Get` or
  :c:func:`PyThreadState_GetUnchecked` instead.
- :c:func:`PyGILState_Check`: use ``PyThreadState_GetUnchecked() != NULL``
  instead.

All of the ``PyGILState`` APIs are to be removed from the non-limited C API in
a future Python version. They will remain available in the stable ABI for
compatibility.

It's worth noting that :c:func:`PyThreadState_Get` and
:c:func:`PyThreadState_GetUnchecked` aren't perfect replacements for
:c:func:`PyGILState_GetThisThreadState`, because
:c:func:`PyGILState_GetThisThreadState` is able to return a thread state even
when it is :term:`detached <attached thread state>`. This PEP intentionally
doesn't leave a perfect replacement for this, because the GIL-state pointer
(which holds the last used thread state by the thread) is only useful for
those implementing :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure` or similar. It's not a
common API to want as a user.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

This PEP specifies a breaking change with the removal of all the
``PyGILState`` APIs from the public headers of the non-limited C API in a
future version.

Security Implications
=====================

This PEP has no known security implications.

How to Teach This
=================

As with all C API functions, all the new APIs in this PEP will be documented
in the C API documentation, ideally under the :ref:`python:gilstate` section.
The existing ``PyGILState`` documentation should be updated accordingly to point
to the new APIs.

Examples
--------

These examples are here to help understand the APIs described in this PEP.
Ideally, they could be reused in the documentation.

Example: A Library Interface
****************************

Imagine that you're developing a C library for logging.
You might want to provide an API that allows users to log to a Python file
object.

With this PEP, you'd implement it like this:

.. code-block:: c

    int
    LogToPyFile(PyInterpreterWeakRef wref,
                PyObject *file,
                const char *text)
    {
        PyInterpreterRef ref;
        if (PyInterpreterWeakRef_AsStrong(wref, &ref) < 0) {
            /* Python interpreter has shut down */
            return -1;
        }

        PyThreadRef thread_ref;
        if (PyThreadState_Ensure(ref, &thread_ref) < 0) {
            PyInterpreterRef_Close(ref);
            puts("Out of memory.\n", stderr);
            return -1;
        }

        char *to_write = do_some_text_mutation(text);
        int res = PyFile_WriteString(to_write, file);
        free(to_write);
        PyErr_Print();

        PyThreadState_Release(thread_ref);
        PyInterpreterRef_Close(ref);
        return res < 0;
    }

If you were to use :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` for this case, then your
thread would hang if the interpreter were to be finalizing at that time!

Additionally, the API supports subinterpreters. If you were to assume that
the main interpreter created the file object (via :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`),
then using file objects owned by a subinterpreter could possibly crash.

Example: A Single-threaded Ensure
*********************************

This example shows acquiring a lock in a Python method.

If this were to be called from a daemon thread, then the interpreter could
hang the thread while reattaching the thread state, leaving us with the lock
held. Any future finalizer that wanted to acquire the lock would be deadlocked!

.. code-block:: c

    static PyObject *
    my_critical_operation(PyObject *self, PyObject *unused)
    {
        assert(PyThreadState_GetUnchecked() != NULL);
        PyInterpreterRef ref;
        if (PyInterpreterRef_Get(&ref) < 0) {
            /* Python interpreter has shut down */
            return NULL;
        }

        Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS;
        acquire_some_lock();

        /* Do something while holding the lock.
           The interpreter won't finalize during this period. */
        // ...

        release_some_lock();
        Py_END_ALLOW_THREADS;
        PyInterpreterRef_Close(ref);
        Py_RETURN_NONE;
    }

Example: Transitioning From the Legacy Functions
************************************************

The following code uses the ``PyGILState`` APIs:

.. code-block:: c

    static int
    thread_func(void *arg)
    {
        PyGILState_STATE gstate = PyGILState_Ensure();
        /* It's not an issue in this example, but we just attached
           a thread state for the main interpreter. If my_method() was
           originally called in a subinterpreter, then we would be unable
           to safely interact with any objects from it. */
        if (PyRun_SimpleString("print(42)") < 0) {
            PyErr_Print();
        }
        PyGILState_Release(gstate);
        return 0;
    }

    static PyObject *
    my_method(PyObject *self, PyObject *unused)
    {
        PyThread_handle_t handle;
        PyThead_indent_t indent;

        if (PyThread_start_joinable_thread(thread_func, NULL, &ident, &handle) < 0) {
            return NULL;
        }
        Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS;
        PyThread_join_thread(handle);
        Py_END_ALLOW_THREADS;
        Py_RETURN_NONE;
    }

This is the same code, rewritten to use the new functions:

.. code-block:: c

    static int
    thread_func(void *arg)
    {
        PyInterpreterRef interp = (PyInterpreterRef)arg;
        PyThreadRef thread_ref;
        if (PyThreadState_Ensure(interp, &thread_ref) < 0) {
            PyInterpreterRef_Close(interp);
            return -1;
        }
        if (PyRun_SimpleString("print(42)") < 0) {
            PyErr_Print();
        }
        PyThreadState_Release(thread_ref);
        PyInterpreterRef_Close(interp);
        return 0;
    }

    static PyObject *
    my_method(PyObject *self, PyObject *unused)
    {
        PyThread_handle_t handle;
        PyThead_indent_t indent;

        PyInterpreterRef ref;
        if (PyInterpreterRef_Get(&ref) < 0) {
            return NULL;
        }

        if (PyThread_start_joinable_thread(thread_func, (void *)ref, &ident, &handle) < 0) {
            PyInterpreterRef_Close(ref);
            return NULL;
        }
        Py_BEGIN_ALLOW_THREADS
        PyThread_join_thread(handle);
        Py_END_ALLOW_THREADS
        Py_RETURN_NONE;
    }


Example: A Daemon Thread
************************

With this PEP, daemon threads are very similar to how non-Python threads work
in the C API today. After calling :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure`, simply
release the interpreter reference, allowing the interpreter to shut down.

.. code-block:: c

    static int
    thread_func(void *arg)
    {
        PyInterpreterRef ref = (PyInterpreterRef)arg;
        PyThreadRef thread_ref;
        if (PyThreadState_Ensure(ref, &thread_ref) < 0) {
            PyInterpreterRef_Close(ref);
            return -1;
        }
        /* Release the interpreter reference, allowing it to
           finalize. This means that print(42) can hang this thread. */
        PyInterpreterRef_Close(ref);
        if (PyRun_SimpleString("print(42)") < 0) {
            PyErr_Print();
        }
        PyThreadState_Release(thread_ref);
        return 0;
    }

    static PyObject *
    my_method(PyObject *self, PyObject *unused)
    {
        PyThread_handle_t handle;
        PyThead_indent_t indent;

        PyInterpreterRef ref;
        if (PyInterpreterRef_Get(&ref) < 0) {
            return NULL;
        }

        if (PyThread_start_joinable_thread(thread_func, (void *)ref, &ident, &handle) < 0) {
            PyInterpreterRef_Close(ref);
            return NULL;
        }
        Py_RETURN_NONE;
    }

Example: An Asynchronous Callback
*********************************

In some cases, the thread might not ever start, such as in a callback.
We can't use a strong reference here, because a strong reference would
deadlock the interpreter if it's not released.

.. code-block:: c

    typedef struct {
        PyInterpreterWeakRef wref;
    } ThreadData;

    static int
    async_callback(void *arg)
    {
        ThreadData *data = (ThreadData *)arg;
        PyInterpreterWeakRef wref = data->wref;
        PyInterpreterRef ref;
        if (PyInterpreterWeakRef_AsStrong(wref, &ref) < 0) {
            fputs("Python has shut down!\n", stderr);
            return -1;
        }

        PyThreadRef thread_ref;
        if (PyThreadState_Ensure(ref, &thread_ref) < 0) {
            PyInterpreterRef_Close(ref);
            return -1;
        }
        if (PyRun_SimpleString("print(42)") < 0) {
            PyErr_Print();
        }
        PyThreadState_Release(thread_ref);
        PyInterpreterRef_Close(ref);
        return 0;
    }

    static PyObject *
    setup_callback(PyObject *self, PyObject *unused)
    {
        // Weak reference to the interpreter. It won't wait on the callback
        // to finalize.
        ThreadData *tdata = PyMem_RawMalloc(sizeof(ThreadData));
        if (tdata == NULL) {
            PyErr_NoMemory();
            return NULL;
        }
        PyInterpreterWeakRef wref;
        if (PyInterpreterWeakRef_Get(&wref) < 0) {
            PyMem_RawFree(tdata);
            return NULL;
        }
        tdata->wref = wref;
        register_callback(async_callback, tdata);

        Py_RETURN_NONE;
    }

Example: Calling Python Without a Callback Parameter
****************************************************

There are a few cases where callback functions don't take a callback parameter
(``void *arg``), so it's impossible to acquire a reference to any specific
interpreter. The solution to this problem is to acquire a reference to the main
interpreter through :c:func:`PyInterpreterRef_Main`.

But wait, won't that break with subinterpreters, per
:ref:`pep-788-subinterpreters-gilstate`? Fortunately, since the callback has
no callback parameter, it's not possible for the caller to pass any objects or
interpreter-specific data, so it's completely safe to choose the main
interpreter here.

.. code-block:: c

    static void
    call_python(void)
    {
        PyInterpreterRef ref;
        if (PyInterpreterRef_Main(&ref) < 0) {
            fputs("Python has shut down!", stderr);
            return;
        }

        PyThreadRef thread_ref;
        if (PyThreadState_Ensure(ref, &thread_ref) < 0) {
            PyInterpreterRef_Close(ref);
            return -1;
        }
        if (PyRun_SimpleString("print(42)") < 0) {
            PyErr_Print();
        }
        PyThreadState_Release(thread_ref);
        PyInterpreterRef_Close(ref);
        return 0;
    }

Reference Implementation
========================

A reference implementation of this PEP can be found
at `python/cpython#133110 <https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/133110>`_.

Rejected Ideas
==============

Non-daemon Thread States
------------------------

In prior iterations of this PEP, interpreter references were a property of
a thread state rather than a property of an interpreter. This meant that
:c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure` stole a strong interpreter reference, and
it was released upon calling :c:func:`PyThreadState_Release`. A thread state
that held a reference to an interpreter was known as a "non-daemon thread
state." At first, this seemed like an improvement, because it shifted management
of a reference's lifetime to the thread instead of the user, which eliminated
some boilerplate.

However, this ended up making the proposal significantly more complex and
hurt the proposal's goals:

- Most importantly, non-daemon thread states put too much emphasis on daemon
  threads as the problem, which hurt the clarity of the PEP. Additionally, the
  phrase "non-daemon" added extra confusion, because non-daemon Python threads
  are explicitly joined, whereas a non-daemon C thread is only waited on
  until it releases its reference.
- In many cases, an interpreter reference should outlive a singular thread
  state. Stealing the interpreter reference in :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure`
  was particularly troublesome for these cases. If :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure`
  didn't steal a reference with non-daemon thread states, it would muddy the
  ownership story of the interpreter reference, leading to a more confusing API.

Retrofiting the Existing Structures with Reference Counts
---------------------------------------------------------

Interpreter-State Pointers for Reference Counting
*************************************************

Originally, this PEP specified :c:func:`!PyInterpreterState_Hold`
and :c:func:`!PyInterpreterState_Release` for managing strong references
to an interpreter, alongside :c:func:`!PyInterpreterState_Lookup` which
converted interpreter IDs (weak references) to strong references.

In the end, this was rejected, primarily because it was needlessly
confusing. Interpreter states hadn't ever had a reference count prior, so
there was a lack of intuition about when and where something was a strong
reference. The :c:type:`PyInterpreterRef` and :c:type:`PyInterpreterWeakRef`
types seem a lot clearer.

Interpreter IDs for Reference Counting
**************************************

Some iterations of this API took an ``int64_t interp_id`` parameter instead of
``PyInterpreterState *interp``, because interpreter IDs cannot be concurrently
deleted and cause use-after-free violations. The reference counting APIs in
this PEP sidestep this issue anyway, but an interpreter ID have the advantage
of requiring less magic:

-  Nearly all existing interpreter APIs already return a :c:type:`PyInterpreterState`
   pointer, not an interpreter ID. Functions like
   :c:func:`PyThreadState_GetInterpreter` would have to be accompanied by
   frustrating calls to :c:func:`PyInterpreterState_GetID`.
-  Threads typically take a ``void *arg`` parameter, not an ``int64_t arg``.
   As such, passing a reference requires much less boilerplate
   for the user, because an additional structure definition or heap allocation
   would be needed to store the interpreter ID. This is especially an issue
   on 32-bit systems, where ``void *`` is too small for an ``int64_t``.
-  To retain usability, interpreter ID APIs would still need to keep a
   reference count, otherwise the interpreter could be finalizing before
   the non-Python thread gets a chance to attach. The problem with using an
   interpreter ID is that the reference count has to be "invisible"; it
   must be tracked elsewhere in the interpreter, likely being *more*
   complex than :c:func:`PyInterpreterRef_Get`. There's also a lack
   of intuition that a standalone integer could have such a thing as
   a reference count.

.. _pep-788-activate-deactivate-instead:

Exposing an ``Activate``/``Deactivate`` API instead of ``Ensure``/``Clear``
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

In prior discussions of this API, it was
`suggested <https://discuss.python.org/t/83959/2>`_ to provide actual
:c:type:`PyThreadState` pointers in the API in an attempt to
make the ownership and lifetime of the thread state clearer:

    More importantly though, I think this makes it clearer who owns the thread
    state - a manually created one is controlled by the code that created it,
    and once it's deleted it can't be activated again.

This was ultimately rejected for two reasons:

-  The proposed API has closer usage to
   :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure` & :c:func:`PyGILState_Release`, which helps
   ease the transition for old codebases.
-  It's `significantly easier <https://discuss.python.org/t/83959/15>`_
   for code-generators like Cython to use, as there isn't any additional
   complexity with tracking :c:type:`PyThreadState` pointers around.

Using ``PyStatus`` for the Return Value of ``PyThreadState_Ensure``
-------------------------------------------------------------------

In prior iterations of this API, :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure` returned a
:c:type:`PyStatus` instead of an integer to denote failures, which had the
benefit of providing an error message.

This was rejected because it's `not clear <https://discuss.python.org/t/83959/7>`_
that an error message would be all that useful; all the conceived use-cases
for this API wouldn't really care about a message indicating why Python
can't be invoked. As such, the API would only be needlessly harder to use,
which in turn would hurt the transition from :c:func:`PyGILState_Ensure`.

In addition, :c:type:`PyStatus` isn't commonly used in the C API. A few
functions related to interpreter initialization use it (simply because they
can't raise exceptions), and :c:func:`PyThreadState_Ensure` does not fall
under that category.

Acknowledgements
================

This PEP is based on prior work, feedback, and discussions from many people,
including Victor Stinner, Antoine Pitrou, Da Woods, Sam Gross, Matt Page,
Ronald Oussoren, Matt Wozniski, Eric Snow, Steve Dower, Petr Viktorin,
and Gregory P. Smith.

Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
