PEP: 759
Title: External Wheel Hosting
Author: Barry Warsaw <barry@python.org>,
        Emma Harper Smith <emma@python.org>
PEP-Delegate: Donald Stufft <donald@python.org>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-759-external-wheel-hosting/66458
Status: Withdrawn
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Created: 01-Oct-2024
Post-History: 10-Oct-2024, 31-Jan-2025
Resolution: `31-Jan-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-759-external-wheel-hosting/66458/48>`__

Abstract
========

This PEP proposes a mechanism by which projects hosted on `pypi.org
<https://pypi.org>`__ can safely host wheel artifacts on external sites other
than PyPI. This PEP explicitly does *not* propose external hosting of
projects, packages, or their metadata. That functionality is already available
by externally hosting independent package indexes. Because this PEP only
provides a mechanism for projects to customize the download URL for specific
released wheel artifacts, dependency resolution as already implemented by
common installer tools such as `pip <https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/>`__ and
`uv <https://docs.astral.sh/uv/>`__ does not need to change.

This PEP defines what it means to be "safe" in this context, along with a new
package upload file format called a ``.rim`` file. It defines how ``.rim``
files affect the metadata returned for a package's :ref:`Simple Repository API
<packaging:simple-repository-api>`
in both HTML and JSON formats, and how traditional wheels can easily be turned
into ``.rim`` files.

PEP withdrawn
=============

This PEP was withdrawn by the authors on 2025-01-31.  Our reading of the sentiment in the discussion
thread is that, while the problems this PEP attempts to solve are valid, most folks would prefer a
different approach.  Specifically, our read is that most users would prefer more control over the
ability to specify multiple indexes, how those indexes interoperate, and the priority and trust
assertions for those indexes.  For example, solutions such as :pep:`766` may provide a better way
forward.  Existing stop gap measures (e.g. PyPI limit increase requests and the `"wheel-stub"
<https://pypi.org/project/wheel-stub/>`_ approach) are sufficient -- if not ideal -- in the
meantime.  The authors wish to thank everyone who contributed to the constructive discussion, and
especially those who showed their support for this PEP, both in public and private.

Rationale
=========

The Python Package Index, hosted at https://pypi.org, imposes `default limits
<https://pypi.org/help/>`__ on upload artifact file size (100 MiB) and total project size
(10 GiB). Most projects can comfortably fit within these limits during the lifetime of the
project, through years of uploads. A few projects have encountered these limits, and have
been granted both file size and project size exceptions, allowing them to continue
uploading new releases without having to take more drastic measures, such as removing
files which may potentially still be in use by consumers (e.g. through version pins).

A related workaround is the `"wheel stub" <https://github.com/wheel-next/wheel-stub>`__
approach, which provides an indirect link between PyPI and an external third party package
index, where such limitations can be avoided. Wheel stubs are :ref:`source distributions
<packaging:source-distribution-format>` (a.k.a. "sdists") which utilize a :pep:`517` build
backend that, instead of turning source code into a binary wheel, performs some logic to
calculate the URL for an existing, externally hosted wheel to download and install.  This
approach works, but it obscures the connection between PyPI, the sdist, and the externally
hosted wheel, since there is no way to present this information to ``pip`` or other such
tools.

Historical context
------------------

In 2013, :pep:`438` proposed a "backward-compatible two-phase transition
process" to modify several aspects of release file hosting on PyPI. As this
PEP describes, PyPI originally supported only project and release
*registration* without also allowing for artifact file hosting. As such, most
projects hosted release file artifacts elsewhere. Artifact hosting was later
added, but the mix of externally and PyPI-hosted files led to a wide range of
usability and potential security-related problems. PEP 438 was an attempt to
provide several facilities to allow external hosting while promoting a
PyPI-first hosting preference.

PEP 438 was complex, with three different "hosting modes", ``rel`` metadata in
the simple HTML index pages to signify hosting locations, and a two-phase
transition plan affecting PyPI and installer tools.  PEP 438 was ultimately
retracted in 2015 by :pep:`470`, which acknowledges that PEP 438 did succeed
in...

   bringing about more people to utilize PyPI's repository features, an
   altogether good thing given the global CDN powering PyPI providing speed
   ups for a lot of people[...]

Instead of external hosting, PEP 470 promoted the use of explicit multiple
repositories, providing full package indexing and artifact hosting, and
enabled through installer tool support, such as ``pip install
--extra-index-url`` allowing ``pip`` to essentially treat multiple
repositories as `one single global repository
<https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/cli/pip_install/#cmdoption-extra-index-url>`__
for package installation resolution. Because this has been the blessed norm
for so many years, all Python package installation tools support querying
multiple indexes for dependency resolution.

The problem with multiple indexes
---------------------------------

Why then does this PEP propose to allow a more limited form of external
hosting, and how does this proposal avoid the problems documented in PEP 470?

One well-known problem that consolidating multiple indexes enables is
`dependency confusion attacks
<https://medium.com/@alex.birsan/dependency-confusion-4a5d60fec610>`__, to
which Python *can* be particularly vulnerable, due to the algorithm that ``pip
install`` uses for resolving package dependencies and preferred versions. The
``uv`` tool addresses this by supporting an additional `index strategy
<https://docs.astral.sh/uv/reference/settings/#index-strategy>`__ option,
whereby users can select between, e.g. a ``pip``-compatible strategy, and a
more limited strategy that prevents such dependency confusion attacks.

:pep:`708` provides additional background about dependency confusion attacks,
and takes a different approach to preventing them. At its core, PEP 708 allows
repository owners to indicate that projects track across different
repositories, which allows installers to determine how to treat the global
package namespace when combined across multiple repositories. PEP 708 has been
provisionally accepted, pending several required conditions as outlined in PEP
708, some of which may have an indeterminate future. As PEP 708 itself says,
this won't by itself solve dependency confusion attacks, but is one way to
provide enough information to installers to help minimize these attacks.

While there can still be valid use cases for standing up a totally independent
package index (such as providing richer platform support for GPUs until a
fully formed `variant proposal
<https://discuss.python.org/t/selecting-variant-wheels-according-to-a-semi-static-specification/53446>`__
is accepted), this PEP takes a different, simpler approach and doesn't replace
any of the existing, proposed, or approved package index cooperation
specifications.

This PEP also preserves the core purpose of PyPI, and allows it to
remain the traditional, canonical, centralized index of all Python
packages.

Addressing PyPI limits
----------------------

This proposal also addresses the problem of size limits imposed by PyPI, where there is a
`default artifact size limit <https://pypi.org/help/#file-size-limit>`__ of 100 MiB and a
default overall `project size limit <https://pypi.org/help/#project-size-limit>`__ of 10
GiB. Most packages and artifacts can easily fit in these limits, even for packages
containing binary extension modules for a variety of platforms. A small, but important
class of packages routinely exceed these limits, requiring them to submit PyPI `exception
request support tickets`_. It's not necessarily difficult to get resolution on such
exceptions, but it is a special process that can take some time to resolve, and the
criteria for granting such exceptions aren't well documented.

Reducing operational complexity
-------------------------------

Setting up and maintaining an entire package index can be a complex
operational solution, both time and resource intensive. This is especially
true if the main purpose of such an index is just to avoid file size
limitations. The external index approach also imposes a tricky UX on consumers
of projects on the external index, requiring them to understand how CLI
options such as ``--external-index-url`` work, along with the security
implications of such flags. It would be much easier for both producers and
consumers of large wheel packages to just set up and maintain a simple web
server, capable of serving individual files with no more complex API than
``HTTP GET``. Such an interface is also easily cacheable or placed behind a
`CDN <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Content_delivery_network>`__. Simple HTTP
servers are also much easier to audit for security purposes, easier to proxy,
and usually take much less resources to run, support, and maintain.  Even
something like `Amazon S3 <https://aws.amazon.com/s3/>`__ could be used to
host external wheels.

This PEP proposes an approach that favors such operational simplicity.

Specification
=============

A new type of uploadable file is defined, called a "RIM" (i.e. ``.rim``), or "Remote
Installable Metadata" file.  The name evokes the image of a wheel with the tire removed,
and emphasizes that ``.rim`` files are easily derived from ``.whl`` files.  The process of
turning a ``.whl`` into a ``.rim`` is :ref:`outlined below <dismounting>`. The file name
format exactly matches the :ref:`wheel file naming format
<packaging:wheel-file-name-spec>` specification, except that RIM files use the suffix
``.rim``. This means that all the tags used to discriminate ``.whl`` files also
distinguish between different ``.rim`` files, and thus can be used during dependency
resolution steps, exactly as ``.whl`` files are today. In this respect, ``.whl`` and
``.rim`` files are interchangeable.

The content of a ``.rim`` file is *nearly* identical to ``.whl`` files, however ``.rim``
files **MUST** contain only the ``.dist-info`` directory from a wheel. No other top-level
file or directory is allowed in the ``.rim`` zip file. The ``.dist-info`` directory
**MUST** contain a single additional file in addition to those `allowed`_ in a ``.whl``
file's ``.dist-info`` directory: a file called ``EXTERNAL-HOSTING.json``.

.. _file-format:

This is a JSON file contains containing the following keys:

``version``
    This is the file format version, which for this PEP **MUST** be ``1.0``.
``owner``
    This **MUST** name the PyPI organization owner of this externally hosted file, for
    reasons which will be described in :ref:`detail below <resiliency>`.
``uri``
    This is a single URL naming the location of the physical ``.whl`` file hosted on an
    external site. This URL **MUST** use the ``https`` scheme.
``size``
    This is an integer value describing the size in bytes of the physical ``.whl`` file on
    the remote host.
``hashes``
    This is a dictionary of the format described in :pep:`694`, used to capture both the
    :pep:`694#upload-each-file` of the physical ``.whl`` file, with the same
    constraints as proposed in that PEP.  Since these hashes are immutable once uploaded
    to PyPI, they serve as a critical validation that the externally hosted wheel hasn't
    been corrupted or compromised.

Effects of the RIM file
-----------------------

The only effect of a ``.rim`` file is to change the download URL for the wheel artifact in
both the HTML and JSON interfaces in the `simple repository API`_.  In the HTML page for a
package release, the ``href`` attribute **MUST** be the value of the ``uri`` key,
including a ``#<hashname>=<hashvalue>`` fragment.  this hash fragment **MUST** be in
exactly the same format as described the :pep:`376` originated `signed wheel file format`_
in the ``.dist-info/RECORD`` file. The exact same rules for selection of hash algorithm
and encoding is used here.

Similarly in the `JSON response`_ the ``url`` key pointing to the download file must be
the value of the :ref:`uri <file-format>` key, and the ``hashes`` dictionary **MUST** be
included with values populated from the ``hashes`` dictionary provided above.

In all other respects, a compliant package index should treat ``.rim`` files the same as
``.whl`` files, with some other minor exceptions as outlined below. For example, ``.rim``
files can be `deleted <https://pypi.org/help/#deletion>`__ and yanked (:pep:`592`) just
like any ``.whl`` file, with the exact same semantics (i.e. deletions are permanent). When
a ``.rim`` is deleted, an index **MUST NOT** allow a matching ``.whl`` or ``.rim`` file to
be (re-)uploaded.

Availability order
------------------

Externally hosted wheels **MUST** be available before the corresponding ``.rim`` file is
uploaded to PyPI, otherwise a publishing race condition is introduced, although this
requirement **MAY** be relaxed for ``.rim`` files uploaded to a :pep:`694` staged release.

Wheels can override RIMs
------------------------

Indexes **MUST** reject ``.rim`` files if a matching ``.whl`` file already exists with the
exact same file name tags. However, indexes **MAY** accept a ``.whl`` file if a matching
``.rim`` file exists, as long as that ``.rim`` file hasn't been deleted or yanked. This
allows uploaders to replace an externally hosted wheel file with an index hosted wheel
file, but the converse is prohibited. Since the default is to host wheels on the same
package index that contains the package metadata, it is not allowed to "downgrade" an
existing wheel file once uploaded. When a ``.whl`` replaces a ``.rim``, the index **MUST**
provide download URLs for the package using its own hosted file service. When uploading
the overriding ``.whl`` file, the package index **MUST** validate the hash from the
existing ``.rim`` file, and these hashes must match or the overriding upload **MUST** be
rejected.

PyPI API bump unnecessary
-------------------------

It's likely that the changes are backward compatible enough that a bump in the `PyPI
repository version`_ is not necessary. Since ``.rim`` files are essentially changes only
to the upload API, package resolvers and package installers can continue to function with
the APIs they've always supported.

.. _resiliency:

External hosting resiliency
===========================

One of the key concerns leading to PEP 438's revocation in PEP 470 was
potential user confusion when an external index disappeared. From PEP 470:

   This confusion comes down to end users of projects not realizing if a
   project is hosted on PyPI or if it relies on an external service. This
   often manifests itself when the external service is down but PyPI is
   not. People will see that PyPI works, and other projects works, but this
   one specific one does not. They oftentimes do not realize who they need to
   contact in order to get this fixed or what their remediation steps are.

While the problem of external wheel hosting service going down is not directly
solved by this PEP, several safeguards are in place to greatly reduce the
potential burden on PyPI administrators.

This PEP thus proposes that:

- External wheel hosting is only allowed for packages which are owned by
  `organization accounts <https://docs.pypi.org/organization-accounts/>`__.
  External hosting is an organization-wide setting.
- Organization accounts do not automatically gain the ability to externally
  host wheels; this feature MUST be explicitly enabled by PyPI admins at their discretion. Since
  this will not be a common request, we don't expect the overhead to be nearly
  as burdensome as :pep:`541` resolutions, account recovery requests, or even
  file/project size increase requests.  External hosting requests would be
  handled in the same manner as those requests, i.e. via the `PyPI GitHub
  support tracker <https://github.com/pypi/support>`__.
- Organization accounts requesting external wheel hosting **MUST** register their own
  support contact URI, be it a ``mailto`` URI for a contact email address, or the URL to
  the organization's support tracker. Such a contact URI is optional for organizations
  which do not avail themselves of external wheel file hosting.

Combined with the ``EXTERNAL-HOSTING.json`` file's ``owner`` key, this allows for
installer tools to unambiguously redirect any download errors away from the PyPI support
admins and squarely to the organization's support admins.

While the exact mechanics of storing and retrieving this organization support
URL will be defined separately, for the sake of example, let's say a package
``foo`` externally hosts wheel files on ```https://foo.example.com``
<https://foo.example.com>`__ and that host becomes unreachable. When an
installer tool tries to download and install the package ``foo`` wheel, the
download step will fail. The installer would then be able to query PyPI to
provide a useful error message to the end user:

- The installer downloads the ``.rim`` file and reads the ``owner`` key from the
  ``EXTERNAL-HOSTING.json`` file inside the ``.rim`` zip file.
- The installer queries PyPI for the support URI for the organization
  owner of the externally hosted wheel.
- An informative error message would then be displayed, e.g.:

   The externally hosted wheel file ``foo-....whl`` could not be
   downloaded. Please contact support@foo.example.com for help. Do not report
   this to the PyPI administrators.

.. _dismounting:

Dismounting wheels
==================

It is generally very easy to produce a ``.rim`` file from an existing ``.whl``
file. This could be done efficiently by a :pep:`518` build backend with an
additional command line option, or a separate tool which takes a ``.whl`` file
as input and creates the associated ``.rim`` file. To complete the analogy,
the act of turning a ``.whl`` into a ``.rim`` is called "dismounting".  The
steps such a tool would take are:

- Accept as input the source ``.whl`` file, the organization owner of the
  package, and URL at which the ``.whl`` will be hosted, and the support URI
  to report download problems from. These could in fact be captured in the
  ``pyproject.toml`` file, but that specification is out of scope for this
  PEP.
- Unzip the ``.whl`` and create the ``.rim`` zip archive.
- Omit from the ``.rim`` file any path in the ``.whl`` that **isn't** rooted
  at the ``.dist-info`` directory.
- Calculate the hash of the source ``.whl`` file.
- Add the ``EXTERNAL-HOSTING.json`` file containing the JSON keys and values as described
  above, to the ``.rim`` archive.

Changes to tools
================

Theoretically, installer tools shouldn't need any changes, since when they
have identified the wheel to download and install, they simply consult the
download URLs returned by PyPI's Simple API. In practice though, tools such as
``pip`` and ``uv`` may have constrained lists of hosts they will allow
downloads from, such as PyPI's own ``pythonhosted.org`` domain.

In this case, such tools will need to relax those constraints, but the exact policy for
this is left to the installer tools themselves. Any number of approaches could be
implemented, such as downloading the ``.rim`` file and verifying the
``EXTERNAL-HOSTING.json`` metadata, or simply trusting the external downloads for any
wheel with a matching checksum.  They could also query PyPI for the project's organization
owner and support URI before trusting the download. They could warn the user when
externally hosted wheel files are encountered, and/or require the use of a command line
option to enable additional download hosts. Any of these verification policies could be
chosen in configuration files.

Installer tools should also probably provide better error messages when
externally hosted wheels cannot be downloaded, e.g. because a host is
unreachable. As described above, such tools could query enough metadata from
PyPI to provide clear and distinct error messages pointing users to the
package's external hosting support email or issue tracker.

Constraints for external hosting services
=========================================

The following constraints lead to reliable and compatible external wheel hosting services:

- External wheels **MUST** be served over HTTPS, with a certificate signed by
  `Mozilla's root certificate store <https://wiki.mozilla.org/CA>`__. This ensures
  compatibility with `pip <https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/topics/https-certificates/>`__
  and `uv
  <https://docs.astral.sh/uv/configuration/authentication/#custom-ca-certificates>`__.  At
  the time of this writing, ``pip`` 24.2 on Python 3.10 or newer uses the system
  certificate store in addition to the Mozilla store provided by the third party `certifi
  <https://pypi.org/project/certifi/>`__ Python package. ``uv`` uses the Mozilla store
  provided by the `webpki-roots <https://github.com/rustls/webpki-roots>`__ crate, but not
  the system store unless the ``--native-tls`` flag is given [#fn1]_.  *The PyPI
  administrators may modify this requirement in the future, but compatibility with popular
  installers will not be compromised.*
- External wheel hosts **SHOULD** use a content delivery network (`CDN
  <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Content_delivery_network>`__), just as PyPI does.
- External wheel hosts **MUST** commit to a stable URL for all wheels they host.
- Externally hosted wheels **MUST NOT** be removed from an external wheel host unless the
  corresponding ``.rim`` file is deleted from PyPI first, and **MUST NOT** remove external
  wheels for yanked releases.
- External wheel hosts **MUST** support `HTTP range requests`_.
- External wheel hosts **SHOULD** support the `HTTP/2`_ protocol.

Security
========

Several factors as described in this proposal should mitigate security
concerns with externally hosted wheels, such as:

- Wheel file checksums **MUST** be included in ``.rim`` files, and once uploaded cannot be
  changed. Since the checksum stored on PyPI is immutable and required, it is not possible
  to spoof an external wheel file, even if the owning organization lost control of their
  hosting domain.
- Externally hosted wheels **MUST** be served over HTTPS.
- In order to serve externally hosted wheels, organizations **MUST** be approved by the
  PyPI admins.

When users identify malware or vulnerabilities in PyPI-hosted projects, they can now
report this using the `malware reporting facilities <https://pypi.org/security/>`__ on
PyPI, as also described in this `blog post`_.  The same process can be used to report
security issues in externally hosted wheels, and the same remediation process should be
used.  In addition, since organizations with external hosting enabled MUST provide a
support contact URI, that URI can be used in some cases to report the security issue to
the hosting organization.  Such organization reporting won't make sense for malware, but
could indeed be a very useful way to report security vulnerabilities in externally hosted
wheels.

Rejected ideas
==============

Several ideas were considered and rejected.

- Requiring digital signatures on externally hosted wheel files, either in
  addition to or other than hashes. We deem this unnecessary since the
  checksum requirement should be enough to validate that the metadata on PyPI
  for a wheel exactly matches the downloaded wheel.  The added complexity of
  key management outweighs any additional benefit such digital signatures
  might convey.

- Hash verification on ``.rim`` file uploads. PyPI *could* verify that the hash in the
  uploaded ``.rim`` file matches the externally hosted wheel before it accepts the upload,
  but this requires downloading the external wheel and performing the checksum, which also
  implies that the upload of the ``.rim`` file cannot be accepted until this external
  ``.whl`` file is downloaded and verified. This increases PyPI bandwidth and slows down
  the upload query, although :pep:`694` draft uploads could potentially mitigate these
  concerns. Still, the benefit is not likely worth the additional complexity.

- Periodic verification of the download URLs by the index. PyPI could try to periodically
  ensure that the external wheel host or the external ``.whl`` file itself is still
  available, e.g. via an :rfc:`HTTP HEAD <9110#section-9.3.2>` request. This is likely overkill and without also
  providing the file's checksum in the response [#fn2]_, may not provide much additional
  benefit.

- This PEP could allow for an organization to provide fallback download hosts,
  such that a secondary is available if the primary goes down.  We believe
  that DNS-based replication is a much better, well-known technique, and
  probably much more resilient anyway.

- ``.rim`` file replacement. While it is allowed for ``.whl`` files to replace
  existing ``.rim`` files, as long as a) the ``.rim`` file hasn't been deleted
  or yanked, b) the checksums match, we do not allow replacing ``.whl`` files
  with ``.rim`` files, nor do we allow a ``.rim`` file to overwrite an
  existing ``.rim`` file. This latter could be a technique to change the
  hosting URL for an externally hosted ``.whl``; however, we do not think this
  is a good idea. There are other ways to "fix" an external host URL as
  described above, and we do not want to encourage mass re-uploads of existing
  ``.rim`` files.

Footnotes
=========
.. [#fn1] The ``uv --native-tls`` flag `replaces
          <https://github.com/astral-sh/uv/blob/3ce34035c84804fdfb8b78cf11b9ba1b168d0f35/crates/uv-client/src/base_client.rs#L248>`__
          the ``webpki-roots`` store.
.. [#fn2] There being no standard way to return the file's checksum in response to an
          :rfc:`HTTP HEAD <9110#section-9.3.2>` request.

Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.

.. _`exception request support tickets`: https://github.com/pypi/support/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+file+limit+request
.. _`allowed`: https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/binary-distribution-format/#the-dist-info-directory
.. _`signed wheel file format`: https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/binary-distribution-format/#signed-wheel-files
.. _`simple repository API`: https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/simple-repository-api/#
.. _`JSON response`: https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/simple-repository-api/#json-based-simple-api-for-python-package-indexes
.. _`PyPI repository version`: https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/simple-repository-api/#versioning-pypi-s-simple-api
.. _`blog post`: https://blog.pypi.org/posts/2024-03-06-malware-reporting-evolved/
.. _`HTTP range requests`: https://http.dev/range-request
.. _`HTTP/2`: https://http.dev/2
