PEP: 661
Title: Sentinel Values
Author: Tal Einat <tal@python.org>, Jelle Zijlstra <jelle.zijlstra@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-661-sentinel-values/9126
Status: Final
Type: Standards Track
Created: 06-Jun-2021
Python-Version: 3.15
Post-History: `20-May-2021 <https://discuss.python.org/t/sentinel-values-in-the-stdlib/8810>`__, `06-Jun-2021 <https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-661-sentinel-values/9126>`__
Resolution: `23-Apr-2026 <https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-661-sentinel-values/9126/337>`__

.. canonical-doc:: :external+py3.15:class:`sentinel`

Abstract
========

Unique placeholder values, commonly known as "sentinel values", are common in
programming.  They have many uses, such as for:

* Default values for function arguments, for when a value was not given::

    def foo(value=None):
        ...

* Return values from functions when something is not found or unavailable::

    >>> "abc".find("d")
    -1

* Missing data, such as NULL in relational databases or "N/A" ("not
  available") in spreadsheets

Python has the special value ``None``, which is intended to be used as such
a sentinel value in most cases.  However, sometimes an alternative sentinel
value is needed, usually when it needs to be distinct from ``None`` since
``None`` is a valid value in that context.  Such cases are common enough that
several idioms for implementing such sentinels have arisen over the years, but
uncommon enough that there hasn't been a clear need for standardization.
However, the common implementations, including some in the stdlib, suffer from
several significant drawbacks.

This PEP proposes adding a built-in class for defining sentinel values, to
be used in the stdlib and made publicly available to all Python code.
Sentinels can be defined in Python with the ``sentinel()`` built-in class,
and in C with the ``PySentinel_New()`` C API function.

Note: Changing all existing sentinels in the stdlib to be implemented this
way is not deemed necessary, and whether to do so is left to the discretion
of the maintainers.


Motivation
==========

In May 2021, a question was brought up on the python-dev mailing list
[1]_ about how to better implement a sentinel value for
``traceback.print_exception``.  The existing implementation used the
following common idiom::

    _sentinel = object()

However, this object has an uninformative and overly verbose repr, causing the
function's signature to be overly long and hard to read::

    >>> help(traceback.print_exception)
    Help on function print_exception in module traceback:

    print_exception(exc, /, value=<object object at
    0x000002825DF09650>, tb=<object object at 0x000002825DF09650>,
    limit=None, file=None, chain=True)

Additionally, two other drawbacks of many existing sentinels were brought up
in the discussion:

1. Some do not have a distinct type, hence it is impossible to define clear
   type signatures for functions with such sentinels as default values.
2. They behave unexpectedly after being copied, due to a separate instance
   being created and thus comparisons using ``is`` failing.  Some common
   sentinel idioms have similar problems after being pickled and unpickled.

In the ensuing discussion, Victor Stinner supplied a list of currently used
sentinel values in the Python standard library [2]_.  This showed that the
need for sentinels is fairly common, that there are various implementation
methods used even within the stdlib, and that many of these suffer from at
least one of the three above drawbacks.

The discussion did not lead to any clear consensus on whether a standard
implementation method is needed or desirable, whether the drawbacks mentioned
are significant, nor which kind of implementation would be good.  The author
of this PEP created an issue on bugs.python.org (now a GitHub issue [3]_)
suggesting options for improvement, but that focused on only a single
problematic aspect of a few cases, and failed to gather any support.

A poll [4]_ was created on discuss.python.org to get a clearer sense of
the community's opinions. After nearly two weeks, significant further,
discussion, and 39 votes, the poll's results were not conclusive. 40% had
voted for "The status-quo is fine / there’s no need for consistency in
this", but most voters had voted for one or more standardized solutions.
Specifically, 37% of the voters chose "Consistent use of a new, dedicated
sentinel factory / class / meta-class, also made publicly available in the
stdlib".

With such mixed opinions, this PEP was created to facilitate making a decision
on the subject.

While working on this PEP, iterating on various options and implementations
and continuing discussions, the author has come to the opinion that a simple,
good implementation available in the standard library would be worth having,
both for use in the standard library itself and elsewhere.


Rationale
=========

The criteria guiding the chosen implementation were:

1. The sentinel objects should behave as expected by a sentinel object: When
   compared using the ``is`` operator, it should always be considered
   identical to itself but never to any other object.
2. Creating a sentinel object should be a simple, straightforward one-liner.
3. It should be simple to define as many distinct sentinel values as needed.
4. The sentinel objects should have a clear and short repr.
5. It should be possible to use clear type signatures for sentinels.
6. The sentinel objects should behave correctly after copying, and sentinels
   should have predictable behavior when pickled and unpickled.
7. Such sentinels should work when using CPython 3.x and PyPy3, and ideally
   also with other implementations of Python.
8. As simple and straightforward as possible, in implementation and especially
   in use.  Avoid this becoming one more special thing to learn when learning
   Python.  It should be easy to find and use when needed, and obvious enough
   when reading code that one would normally not feel a need to look up its
   documentation.

With so many uses in the Python standard library [2]_, it would be useful to
have an implementation available to the standard library, since the stdlib
cannot use implementations of sentinel objects available elsewhere (such as
the ``sentinels`` [5]_ or ``sentinel`` [6]_ PyPI packages).

After researching existing idioms and implementations, and going through many
different possible implementations, the design below was chosen to meet these
criteria while keeping the API and implementation small (see
`Reference Implementation`_).


Specification
=============

A new built-in callable named ``sentinel`` will be added.

    >>> MISSING = sentinel('MISSING')
    >>> MISSING
    MISSING

``sentinel()`` takes a single positional-only argument, ``name``, which must
be a ``str``.  Passing a non-string raises ``TypeError``.  The name is used as
the sentinel's name and repr.

Sentinel objects have two public attributes:

* ``__name__`` is the sentinel's name.
* ``__module__`` is the name of the module where ``sentinel()`` was called.

``sentinel`` may not be subclassed.

Each call to ``sentinel(name)`` returns a new sentinel object.  If a sentinel
is needed in more than one place, it should be assigned to a variable and that
same object should be reused explicitly, just as with the common
``MISSING = object()`` idiom::

    MISSING = sentinel('MISSING')

    def read_value(default=MISSING):
        ...

Checking if a value is such a sentinel *should* be done using the ``is``
operator, as is recommended for ``None``.  Equality checks using ``==`` will
also work as expected, returning ``True`` only when the object is compared
with itself.  Identity checks such as ``if value is MISSING:`` should usually
be used rather than boolean checks such as ``if value:`` or ``if not value:``.

Sentinel objects are "truthy", i.e. boolean evaluation will result in
``True``.  This parallels the default for arbitrary classes, as well as the
boolean value of ``Ellipsis``. This is unlike ``None``, which is "falsy".

Creating a copy of a sentinel object, such as by using ``copy.copy()`` or by
``copy.deepcopy()``, will return the same object.

Sentinels importable from their defining module by name preserve their identity
when pickled and unpickled, using the standard pickle mechanism for named
singletons.  When ``sentinel()`` creates a sentinel, it records the calling
module as the sentinel's ``__module__`` attribute.  Pickling records the
sentinel by module and name.  Unpickling then imports the module and retrieves
the sentinel by name, so the following round trip preserves identity::

    MISSING = sentinel('MISSING')
    assert pickle.loads(pickle.dumps(MISSING)) is MISSING

Sentinels that are not importable by module and name, such as sentinels
created in a local scope and not assigned to a matching module global or class
attribute, are not picklable.

The repr of a sentinel object is the ``name`` passed to ``sentinel()``.  No
implicit module qualification is added.  If a qualified repr is desired, the
qualified name should be passed explicitly::

    >>> MyClass_NotGiven = sentinel('MyClass.NotGiven')
    >>> MyClass_NotGiven
    MyClass.NotGiven

Ordering comparisons are undefined for sentinel objects. Sentinels do not
support weakrefs.

Typing
------

To make usage of sentinels clear and simple in typed Python code, we propose to
amend the type system with a special case for sentinel objects.

Sentinel objects may be used in
:term:`type expressions <typing:type expression>`, representing themselves.
This is similar to how ``None`` is handled in the existing type system. For
example::

    MISSING = sentinel('MISSING')

    def foo(value: int | MISSING = MISSING) -> int:
        ...

More formally, type checkers should recognize sentinel creations of the form
``NAME = sentinel('NAME')`` as creating a new sentinel object. If the name
passed to ``sentinel()`` does not match the name the object is
assigned to, type checkers should emit an error.

Sentinels defined using this syntax may be used in
:term:`type expressions <typing:type expression>`. They
represent a :term:`fully static type <typing:fully static type>` that has a
single member, the sentinel object itself.

Type checkers should support narrowing union types involving sentinels
using the ``is`` and ``is not`` operators::

    from typing import assert_type

    MISSING = sentinel('MISSING')

    def foo(value: int | MISSING) -> None:
        if value is MISSING:
            assert_type(value, MISSING)
        else:
            assert_type(value, int)

To support usage in type expressions, the runtime implementation
of sentinel objects should have the ``__or__`` and ``__ror__``
methods, returning :py:class:`typing.Union` objects.

The Typing Council `supports <https://github.com/python/steering-council/issues/258#issuecomment-2417524379>`_
this part of the proposal.

C API
-----

Sentinels can also be useful in C extensions. We propose two new
C API functions:

* ``PyObject *PySentinel_New(const char *name, const char *module_name)`` creates a new sentinel object.
* ``bool PySentinel_Check(PyObject *obj)`` checks if an object is a sentinel.

C code can use the ``==`` operator to check if an object is a
specific sentinel.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Adding a new builtin means that code which currently relies on the bare name
``sentinel`` raising ``NameError`` will instead see the new builtin.  This is
the usual compatibility consideration for new builtins.  Existing local,
global, and imported names called ``sentinel`` are unaffected.
Code that already uses the name ``sentinel`` will have to be adapted to use
the new builtin and may receive new linter errors from linters that warn
about collisions with builtin names.


How to Teach This
=================

The normal types of documentation of new builtins and features, namely
docstrings, library docs and a section in "What's New", should suffice.


Security Implications
=====================

This proposal should have no security implications.


Reference Implementation
========================

A reference implementation is available as a CPython pull request [10]_.  A
previous reference implementation is found in a dedicated GitHub repo [7]_.
A sketch of the intended behavior follows::

    class sentinel:
        """Unique sentinel values."""

        __slots__ = ("__name__", "_module_name")

        def __init_subclass__(cls):
            raise TypeError("type 'sentinel' is not an acceptable base type")

        def __init__(self, name, /):
            if not isinstance(name, str):
                raise TypeError("sentinel name must be a string")
            self.__name__ = name
            self._module_name = sys._getframemodulename(1)

        @property
        def __module__(self):
            return self._module_name

        def __repr__(self):
            return self.__name__

        def __reduce__(self):
            return self.__name__

        def __copy__(self):
            return self

        def __deepcopy__(self, memo):
            return self

        def __or__(self, other):
            return typing.Union[self, other]

        def __ror__(self, other):
            return typing.Union[other, self]

A backport `exists <https://typing-extensions.readthedocs.io/en/latest/#typing_extensions.Sentinel>`_
in the :pypi:`typing-extensions` module, though its behavior does not precisely
match the current iteration of this PEP.


Rejected Ideas
==============


Use ``NotGiven = object()``
---------------------------

This suffers from all of the drawbacks mentioned in the `Rationale`_ section.


Add a single new sentinel value, such as ``MISSING`` or ``Sentinel``
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Since such a value could be used for various things in various places, one
could not always be confident that it would never be a valid value in some use
cases.  On the other hand, a dedicated and distinct sentinel value can be used
with confidence without needing to consider potential edge-cases.

Additionally, it is useful to be able to provide a meaningful name and repr
for a sentinel value, specific to the context where it is used.

Finally, this was a very unpopular option in the poll [4]_, with only 12%
of the votes voting for it.


Use the existing ``Ellipsis`` sentinel value
--------------------------------------------

This is not the original intended use of Ellipsis, though it has become
increasingly common to use it to define empty class or function blocks instead
of using ``pass``.

Also, similar to a potential new single sentinel value, ``Ellipsis`` can't be
as confidently used in all cases, unlike a dedicated, distinct value.


Use a single-valued enum
------------------------

The suggested idiom is::

    class NotGivenType(Enum):
        NotGiven = 'NotGiven'
    NotGiven = NotGivenType.NotGiven

Besides the excessive repetition, the repr is overly long:
``<NotGivenType.NotGiven: 'NotGiven'>``.  A shorter repr can be defined, at
the expense of a bit more code and yet more repetition.

Finally, this option was the least popular among the nine options in the
poll [4]_, being the only option to receive no votes.


A sentinel class decorator
--------------------------

The suggested idiom is::

    @sentinel
    class NotGivenType: pass
    NotGiven = NotGivenType()

While this allows for a very simple and clear implementation of the decorator,
the idiom is too verbose, repetitive, and difficult to remember.


Using class objects
-------------------

Since classes are inherently singletons, using a class as a sentinel value
makes sense and allows for a simple implementation.

The simplest version of this is::

   class NotGiven: pass

To have a clear repr, one would need to use a meta-class::

    class NotGiven(metaclass=SentinelMeta): pass

... or a class decorator::

    @Sentinel
    class NotGiven: pass

Using classes this way is unusual and could be confusing.  The intention of
code would be hard to understand without comments.  It would also cause
such sentinels to have some unexpected and undesirable behavior, such as
being callable.


Define a recommended "standard" idiom, without supplying an implementation
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Most common existing idioms have significant drawbacks.  So far, no idiom
has been found that is clear and concise while avoiding these drawbacks.

Also, in the poll [4]_ on this subject, the options for recommending an
idiom were unpopular, with the highest-voted option being voted for by only
25% of the voters.


Use a new standard library module
---------------------------------

Earlier drafts proposed adding a ``Sentinel`` class to a new ``sentinels`` or
``sentinellib`` module.  However, adding a new module for a single public
callable is unnecessary, and using a module makes the feature less convenient
than the existing ``object()`` idiom.  The Steering Council also specifically
encouraged making the feature a builtin so that it is at least as easy to use
as ``object()``.

Using the name ``sentinels`` would also conflict with an existing, actively
used PyPI package.  While other module names are possible, making the feature a
builtin avoids the naming problem entirely.


Use a registry of per-module sentinel names
-------------------------------------------

Earlier drafts proposed making sentinel names unique within each module.  Under
that design, repeated calls such as ``sentinel("MISSING")`` from the same
module would return the same object, using a process-global registry keyed by
module name and sentinel name.

This was rejected because the behavior is too implicit.  Code that needs a
shared sentinel can define one explicitly and reuse it by name, just as code
already does with ``MISSING = object()``.  Code in a local scope may also want
a fresh sentinel for each call or iteration, and repeated calls to
``sentinel(name)`` should behave like repeated calls to ``object()`` by
creating distinct objects.

Removing the registry also keeps the implementation and mental model simpler:
``sentinel(name)`` creates a new unique object whose repr is ``name``.


Automatically discover or pass a module name
--------------------------------------------

Earlier drafts proposed an optional ``module_name`` argument to support the
registry-based design.

With the registry removed, a public ``module_name`` argument is no longer
needed for the core proposal.  The implementation still records the calling
module internally, as ``TypeVar`` and similar helpers do, so that pickle can
serialize importable sentinels by module and name.  This internal module name
does not affect the sentinel's repr.  If users want a repr that includes a
module or class name, they can include it in the single ``name`` argument
explicitly, e.g. ``sentinel("mymodule.MISSING")``.


Allowing customization of repr
------------------------------

This was desirable to allow using this for existing sentinel values without
changing their repr.  However, this was eventually dropped as it wasn't
considered worth the added complexity.


Allowing customization of boolean evaluation
--------------------------------------------

Discussions considered allowing sentinels to be explicitly truthy, falsy, or
not convertible to ``bool``.  Some existing third-party sentinels expose falsy
behavior as part of their public API, and several participants argued that
raising in boolean contexts would better enforce identity checks.

This PEP keeps the initial proposal simpler by giving sentinels the default
truthy behavior of ordinary objects and by recommending identity checks.
Custom boolean behavior may be considered later if the added API and typing
complexity is judged worthwhile.


Using ``typing.Literal`` in type annotations
--------------------------------------------

This was suggested by several people in discussions and is what this PEP
first went with.  However, it was pointed out that this would cause potential
confusion, due to e.g. ``Literal["MISSING"]`` referring to the string value
``"MISSING"`` rather than being a forward-reference to a sentinel value
``MISSING``.  Using the bare name was also suggested often in discussions.
This follows the precedent and well-known pattern set by ``None``, and has the
advantages of not requiring an import and being much shorter.


Additional Notes
================

* For sentinels defined in a class scope, to avoid potential name clashes,
  or when a qualified repr would be clearer, one should pass the desired
  qualified name explicitly.  For example::

      >>> class MyClass:
      ...    NotGiven = sentinel('MyClass.NotGiven')
      >>> MyClass.NotGiven
      MyClass.NotGiven

* Creating sentinels in a function or method is allowed.  Each call to
  ``sentinel()`` creates a distinct object, so a sentinel created in a local
  scope behaves like one created by calling ``object()`` in that scope.

* The boolean value of ``NotImplemented`` is ``True``, but using this is
  deprecated since Python 3.9 (doing so generates a deprecation warning.)
  This deprecation is due to issues specific to ``NotImplemented``, as
  described in bpo-35712 [8]_.

* To define multiple, related sentinel values, possibly with a defined
  ordering among them, one should instead use ``Enum`` or something similar.

* There was a discussion on the typing-sig mailing list [9]_ about the typing
  for these sentinels, where different options were discussed.


Footnotes
=========

.. [1] Python-Dev mailing list: `The repr of a sentinel <https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/thread/ZLVPD2OISI7M4POMTR2FCQTE6TPMPTO3/>`_
.. [2] Python-Dev mailing list: `"The stdlib contains tons of sentinels" <https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/message/JBYXQH3NV3YBF7P2HLHB5CD6V3GVTY55/>`_
.. [3] `bpo-44123: Make function parameter sentinel values true singletons <https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/88289>`_
.. [4] discuss.python.org Poll: `Sentinel Values in the Stdlib <https://discuss.python.org/t/sentinel-values-in-the-stdlib/8810/>`_
.. [5] `The "sentinels" package on PyPI <https://pypi.org/project/sentinels/>`_
.. [6] `The "sentinel" package on PyPI <https://pypi.org/project/sentinel/>`_
.. [7] `Reference implementation at the taleinat/python-stdlib-sentinels GitHub repo <https://github.com/taleinat/python-stdlib-sentinels>`_
.. [8] `bpo-35712: Make NotImplemented unusable in boolean context <https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/79893>`_
.. [9] `Discussion thread about type signatures for these sentinels on the typing-sig mailing list <https://mail.python.org/archives/list/typing-sig@python.org/thread/NDEJ7UCDPINP634GXWDARVMTGDVSNBKV/#LVCPTY26JQJW7NKGKGAZXHQKWVW7GOGL>`_
.. [10] `CPython reference implementation <https://github.com/JelleZijlstra/cpython/pull/4>`_


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
