PEP: 810
Title: Explicit lazy imports
Author: Pablo Galindo <pablogsal@python.org>,
        Germán Méndez Bravo <german.mb@gmail.com>,
        Thomas Wouters <thomas@python.org>,
        Dino Viehland <dinoviehland@gmail.com>,
        Brittany Reynoso <brittanyrey@gmail.com>,
        Noah Kim <noahbkim@gmail.com>,
        Tim Stumbaugh <me@tjstum.com>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/104131
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Created: 02-Oct-2025
Python-Version: 3.15
Post-History:
  `03-Oct-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/104131>`__,


Abstract
========

This PEP introduces syntax for lazy imports as an explicit language feature:

.. code-block:: python

  lazy import json
  lazy from json import dumps

Lazy imports defer the loading and execution of a module until the first time
the imported name is used, in contrast to 'normal' imports, which eagerly load
and execute a module at the point of the import statement.

By allowing developers to mark individual imports as lazy with explicit
syntax, Python programs can reduce startup time, memory usage, and unnecessary
work. This is particularly beneficial for command-line tools, test suites, and
applications with large dependency graphs.

This proposal preserves full backwards compatibility: normal import statements
remain unchanged, and lazy imports are enabled only where explicitly
requested.

Motivation
==========

The dominant convention in Python code is to place all imports at the module
level, typically at the beginning of the file. This avoids repetition, makes
import dependencies clear and minimizes runtime overhead by only evaluating an
import statement once per module.

A major drawback with this approach is that importing the first module for an
execution of Python (the "main" module) often triggers an immediate cascade of
imports, and optimistically loads many dependencies that may never be used.
The effect is especially costly for command-line tools with multiple
subcommands, where even running the command with ``--help`` can load dozens of
unnecessary modules and take several seconds. This basic example demonstrates
what must be loaded just to get helpful feedback to the user on how to run the
program at all. Inefficiently, the user incurs this overhead again when they
figure out the command they want and invoke the program "for real."

A somewhat common way to delay imports is to move the imports into functions
(inline imports), but this practice requires more work to implement and
maintain, and can be subverted by a single inadvertent top-level import.
Additionally, it obfuscates the full set of dependencies for a module.
Analysis of the Python standard library shows that approximately 17% of all
imports outside tests (nearly 3500 total imports across 730 files) are already
placed inside functions or methods specifically to defer their execution. This
demonstrates that developers are already manually implementing lazy imports in
performance-sensitive code, but doing so requires scattering imports
throughout the codebase and makes the full dependency graph harder to
understand at a glance.

The standard library provides the :class:`~importlib.util.LazyLoader` class to
solve some of these inefficiency problems. It permits imports at the module
level to work *mostly* like inline imports do. Many scientific Python
libraries have adopted a similar pattern, formalized in
`SPEC 1 <https://scientific-python.org/specs/spec-0001/>`__.
There's also the third-party :pypi:`lazy_loader` package, yet another
implementation of lazy imports. Imports used solely for static type checking
are another source of potentially unneeded imports, and there are similarly
disparate approaches to minimizing the overhead. The various approaches used
here to defer or remove eager imports do not cover all potential use-cases for
a general lazy import mechanism. There is no clear standard, and there are
several drawbacks including runtime overhead in unexpected places, or worse
runtime introspection.

This proposal introduces syntax for lazy imports with a design that is local,
explicit, controlled, and granular. Each of these qualities is essential to
making the feature predictable and safe to use in practice.

The behavior is **local**: laziness applies only to the specific import marked
with the ``lazy`` keyword, and it does not cascade recursively into other
imports. This ensures that developers can reason about the effect of laziness
by looking only at the line of code in front of them, without worrying about
whether imported modules will themselves behave differently. A ``lazy import``
is an isolated decision each time it is used, not a global shift in semantics.

The semantics are **explicit**. When a name is imported lazily, the binding is
created in the importing module immediately, but the target module is not
loaded until the first time the name is accessed. After this point, the
binding is indistinguishable from one created by a normal import. This clarity
reduces surprises and makes the feature accessible to developers who may not
be deeply familiar with Python’s import machinery.

Lazy imports are **controlled**, in the sense that lazy loading is only
triggered by the importing code itself. In the general case, a library will
only experience lazy imports if its own authors choose to mark them as such.
This avoids shifting responsibility onto downstream users and prevents
accidental surprises in library behavior. Since library authors typically
manage their own import subgraphs, they retain predictable control over when
and how laziness is applied.

The mechanism is also **granular**. It is introduced through explicit syntax
on individual imports, rather than a global flag or implicit setting. This
allows developers to adopt it incrementally, starting with the most
performance-sensitive areas of a codebase. As this feature is introduced to
the community, we want to make the experience of onboarding optional,
progressive, and adaptable to the needs of each project.

Lazy imports provide several concrete advantages:

* Command-line tools are often invoked directly by a user, so latency -- in
  particular startup latency -- is quite noticeable. These programs are also
  typically short-lived processes (contrasted with, e.g., a web server). With
  lazy imports, only the code paths actually reached will import a module.
  This can reduce startup time by 50-70% in practice, providing a significant
  improvement to a common user experience and improving Python's
  competitiveness in domains where fast startup matters most.

* Type annotations frequently require imports that are never used at runtime.
  The common workaround is to wrap them in ``if TYPE_CHECKING:`` blocks
  [#f1]_. With lazy imports, annotation-only imports impose no runtime
  penalty, eliminating the need for such guards and making annotated codebases
  cleaner.

* Large applications often import thousands of modules, and each module
  creates function and type objects, incurring memory costs. In long-lived
  processes, this noticeably raises baseline memory usage. Lazy imports defer
  these costs until a module is needed, keeping unused subsystems unloaded.
  Memory savings of 30-40% have been observed in real workloads.

Rationale
=========

The design of this proposal is centered on clarity, predictability, and ease
of adoption. Each decision was made to ensure that lazy imports provide
tangible benefits without introducing unnecessary complexity into the language
or its runtime.

It is also worth noting that while this PEP outlines one specific approach, we
list alternate implementation strategies for some of the core aspects and
semantics of the proposal. If the community expresses a strong preference for
a different technical path that still preserves the same core semantics or
there is fundamental disagreement over the specific option, we have included
the brainstorming we have already completed in preparation for this proposal
as reference.

The choice to introduce a new ``lazy`` keyword reflects the need for explicit
syntax. Import behavior is too fundamental to be left implicit or hidden
behind global flags or environment variables. By marking laziness directly at
the import site, the intent is immediately visible to both readers and tools.
This avoids surprises, reduces the cognitive burden of reasoning about
imports, and keeps lazy import semantics in line with Python's tradition of
explicitness.

Another important decision is to represent lazy imports with proxy objects in
the module's namespace, rather than by modifying dictionary lookup. Earlier
approaches experimented with embedding laziness into dictionaries, but this
blurred abstractions and risked affecting unrelated parts of the runtime. The
dictionary is a fundamental data structure in Python -- literally every object
is built on top of dicts -- and adding hooks to dictionaries would prevent
critical optimizations and complicate the entire runtime. The proxy approach
is simpler: it behaves like a placeholder until first use, at which point it
resolves the import and rebinds the name. From then on, the binding is
indistinguishable from a normal import. This makes the mechanism easy to
explain and keeps the rest of the interpreter unchanged.

Compatibility for library authors was also a key concern. Many maintainers
need a migration path that allows them to support both new and old versions of
Python at once. For this reason, the proposal includes the
:data:`!__lazy_modules__` global as a transitional mechanism. A module can
declare which imports should be treated as lazy (by listing the module names
as strings), and on Python 3.15 or later those imports will become lazy
automatically, as if they were imported with the ``lazy`` keyword. On earlier
versions the declaration is ignored, leaving imports eager. This gives authors
a practical bridge until they can rely on the keyword as the canonical syntax.

Finally, the feature is designed to be adopted incrementally. Nothing changes
unless a developer explicitly opts in, and adoption can begin with just a few
imports in performance-sensitive areas. This mirrors the experience of gradual
typing in Python: a mechanism that can be introduced progressively, without
forcing projects to commit globally from day one. Notably, the adoption can
also be done from the "outside in", permitting CLI authors to introduce lazy
imports and speed up user-facing tools, without requiring changes to every
library the tool might use.


Other design decisions
----------------------

* The scope of laziness is deliberately local and non-recursive. A lazy import
  only affects the specific statement where it appears; it does not cascade
  into other modules or submodules. This choice is crucial for predictability.
  When developers read code, they can reason about import behavior line by
  line, without worrying about hidden laziness deeper in the dependency graph.
  The result is a feature that is powerful but still easy to understand in
  context.

* In addition, it is useful to provide a mechanism to activate or deactivate
  lazy imports for all code running in the interpreter
  (referred to in this PEP as the 'global lazy imports flag').
  While the primary design centers the explicit ``lazy import`` syntax,
  there are scenarios -- such as large applications, testing environments,
  or frameworks -- where enabling laziness consistently across
  many modules provides the most benefit. A global switch makes it easy to
  experiment with or enforce consistent behavior, while still working in
  combination with the filtering API to respect exclusions or tool-specific
  configuration. This ensures that global adoption can be practical without
  reducing flexibility or control.


Specification
=============

Grammar
-------

A new soft keyword ``lazy`` is added. A soft keyword is a context-sensitive
keyword that only has special meaning in specific grammatical contexts;
elsewhere it can be used as a regular identifier (e.g., as a variable name).
The ``lazy`` keyword only has special meaning when it appears before import
statements:

.. code-block:: text

  import_name:
      | 'lazy'? 'import' dotted_as_names

  import_from:
      | 'lazy'? 'from' ('.' | '...')* dotted_name 'import' import_from_targets
      | 'lazy'? 'from' ('.' | '...')+ 'import' import_from_targets

Syntax restrictions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The soft keyword is only allowed at the global (module) level, **not** inside
functions, class bodies, with ``try``/``with`` blocks, or ``import *``. Import
statements that use the soft keyword are *potentially lazy*. Imports that
can't be lazy are unaffected by the global lazy imports flag, and instead are
always eager.

Examples of syntax errors:

.. code-block:: python

  # SyntaxError: lazy import not allowed inside functions
  def foo():
      lazy import json

  # SyntaxError: lazy import not allowed inside classes
  class Bar:
      lazy import json

  # SyntaxError: lazy import not allowed inside try/except blocks
  try:
      lazy import json
  except ImportError:
      pass

  # SyntaxError: lazy import not allowed inside with blocks
  with suppress(ImportError):
      lazy import json

  # SyntaxError: lazy from ... import * is not allowed
  lazy from json import *

Semantics
---------

When the ``lazy`` keyword is used, the import becomes *potentially lazy*.
Unless lazy imports are disabled or suppressed (see below), the module is not
loaded immediately at the import statement; instead, a lazy proxy object is
created and bound to the name. The actual module is loaded on first use of
that name.

Example:

.. code-block:: python

  import sys

  lazy import json

  print('json' in sys.modules)  # False - module not loaded yet

  # First use triggers loading
  result = json.dumps({"hello": "world"})

  print('json' in sys.modules)  # True - now loaded

A module may contain a :data:`!__lazy_modules__` attribute, which is a
sequence of fully qualified module names (strings) to make *potentially lazy*
(as if the ``lazy`` keyword was used). This attribute is checked on each
``import`` statement to determine whether the import should be made
*potentially lazy*. When a module is made lazy this way, from-imports using
that module are also lazy, but not necessarily imports of sub-modules.

The normal (non-lazy) import statement will check the global lazy imports
flag. If it is "enabled", all imports are *potentially lazy* (except for
imports that can't be lazy, as mentioned above.)

Example:

.. code-block:: python

    __lazy_modules__ = ["json"]
    import json
    print('json' in sys.modules)  # False
    result = json.dumps({"hello": "world"})
    print('json' in sys.modules)  # True

If the global lazy imports flag is set to "disabled", no *potentially lazy*
import is ever imported lazily, and the behavior is equivalent to a regular
import statement: the import is *eager* (as if the lazy keyword was not used).

Finally, the application may use a custom filter function on all *potentially
lazy* imports to determine if they should be lazy or not.
If a filter function is set, it will be called with the name of the module
doing the import, the name of the module being imported, and (if applicable)
the fromlist.
An import remains lazy only if the filter function returns ``True``.

If no lazy import filter is set, all *potentially lazy* imports are lazy.

Lazy import mechanism
---------------------

When an import is lazy, ``__lazy_import__`` is called instead of
``__import__``. ``__lazy_import__`` has the same function signature as
``__import__``. It adds the module name to ``sys.lazy_modules``, a set of
fully-qualified module names which have been lazily imported at some point
(primarily for diagnostics and introspection), and returns a "lazy module
object."

The implementation of ``from ... import`` (the ``IMPORT_FROM`` bytecode
implementation) checks if the module it's fetching from is a lazy module
object, and if so, returns a lazy object for each name instead.

The end result of this process is that lazy imports (regardless of how they
are enabled) result in lazy objects being assigned to global variables.

Lazy module objects do not appear in ``sys.modules``, they're just listed in
the ``sys.lazy_modules`` set. Under normal operation lazy objects should only
end up stored in global variables, and the common ways to access those
variables (regular variable access, module attributes) will resolve lazy
imports ("reify") and replace them when they're accessed.

It is still possible to expose lazy objects through other means, like
debuggers. This is not considered a problem.

Reification
-----------

When a lazy object is first used, it needs to be reified. This means resolving
the import at that point in the program and replacing the lazy object with the
concrete one. Reification imports the module in the same way as it would have
been if it had been imported eagerly, barring intervening changes to the
import system (e.g. to ``sys.path``, ``sys.meta_path``, ``sys.path_hooks`` or
``__import__``).

Reification still calls ``__import__`` to resolve the import. When the module
is first reified, it's removed from ``sys.lazy_modules`` (even if there are
still other unreified lazy references to it). When a package is reified and
submodules in the package were also previously lazily imported, those
submodules are *not* automatically reified but they *are* added to the reified
package's globals (unless the package already assigned something else to the
name of the submodule).

If reification fails (e.g., due to an ``ImportError``), the exception is
enhanced with chaining to show both where the lazy import was defined and
where it was first accessed (even though it propagates from the code that
triggered reification). This provides clear debugging information:

.. code-block:: python

  # app.py - has a typo in the import
  lazy from json import dumsp  # Typo: should be 'dumps'

  print("App started successfully")
  print("Processing data...")

  # Error occurs here on first use
  result = dumsp({"key": "value"})

The traceback shows both locations:

.. code-block:: pytb

  App started successfully
  Processing data...
  Traceback (most recent call last):
    File "app.py", line 2, in <module>
      lazy from json import dumsp
  ImportError: lazy import of 'json.dumsp' raised an exception during resolution

  The above exception was the direct cause of the following exception:

  Traceback (most recent call last):
    File "app.py", line 8, in <module>
      result = dumsp({"key": "value"})
               ^^^^^
  ImportError: cannot import name 'dumsp' from 'json'. Did you mean: 'dump'?

This exception chaining clearly shows:

(1) where the lazy import was defined,
(2) that the module was not eagerly imported, and
(3) where the actual access happened that triggered the error.

Reification does **not** automatically occur when a module that was previously
lazily imported is subsequently eagerly imported. Reification does **not**
immediately resolve all lazy objects (e.g. ``lazy from`` statements) that
referenced the module. It **only** resolves the lazy object being accessed.

Accessing a lazy object (from a global variable or a module attribute) reifies
the object. Accessing a module's ``__dict__`` reifies **all** lazy objects in
that module. Operations that indirectly access ``__dict__`` (such as
:func:`dir`) also trigger this behavior.

Example using ``__dict__`` from external code:

.. code-block:: python

  # my_module.py
  import sys
  lazy import json

  print('json' in sys.modules)  # False - still lazy

  # main.py
  import sys
  import my_module

  # Accessing __dict__ from external code DOES reify all lazy imports
  d = my_module.__dict__

  print('json' in sys.modules)  # True - reified by __dict__ access
  print(type(d['json']))  # <class 'module'>

However, calling ``globals()`` does **not** trigger reification -- it returns
the module's dictionary, and accessing lazy objects through that dictionary
still returns lazy proxy objects that need to be manually reified upon use. A
lazy object can be resolved explicitly by calling the ``get`` method. Other,
more indirect ways of accessing arbitrary globals (e.g. inspecting
``frame.f_globals``) also do **not** reify all the objects.

Example using ``globals()``:

.. code-block:: python

  import sys
  lazy import json

  # Calling globals() does NOT trigger reification
  g = globals()

  print('json' in sys.modules)  # False - still lazy
  print(type(g['json']))  # <class 'lazy_import'>

  # Explicitly reify using the get() method
  resolved = g['json'].get()

  print(type(resolved))  # <class 'module'>
  print('json' in sys.modules)  # True - now loaded


Reference Implementation
========================

A reference implementation is available at:
https://github.com/LazyImportsCabal/cpython/tree/lazy

Bytecode and adaptive specialization
-------------------------------------

Lazy imports are implemented through modifications to four bytecode
instructions: ``IMPORT_NAME``, ``IMPORT_FROM``, ``LOAD_GLOBAL``, and
``LOAD_NAME``.

The ``lazy`` syntax sets a flag in the ``IMPORT_NAME`` instruction's oparg
(``oparg & 0x01``). The interpreter checks this flag and calls
``_PyEval_LazyImportName()`` instead of ``_PyEval_ImportName()``, creating a
lazy import object rather than executing the import immediately. The
``IMPORT_FROM`` instruction checks whether its source is a lazy import
(``PyLazyImport_CheckExact()``) and creates a lazy object for the attribute
rather than accessing it immediately.

When a lazy object is accessed, it must be reified. The ``LOAD_GLOBAL``
instruction (used in function scopes) and ``LOAD_NAME`` instruction (used at
module and class level) both check whether the object being loaded is a lazy
import. If so, they call ``_PyImport_LoadLazyImportTstate()`` to perform the
actual import and store the module in ``sys.modules``.

This check incurs a very small cost on each access. However, Python's adaptive
interpreter can specialize ``LOAD_GLOBAL`` after observing that a lazy import
has been reified. After several executions, ``LOAD_GLOBAL`` becomes
``LOAD_GLOBAL_MODULE``, which accesses the module dictionary directly without
checking for lazy imports.

Examples of the bytecode generated:

.. code-block:: python

  lazy import json  # IMPORT_NAME with flag set

Generates:

.. code-block:: text

  IMPORT_NAME              1 (json + lazy)

.. code-block:: python

  lazy from json import dumps  # IMPORT_NAME + IMPORT_FROM

Generates:

.. code-block:: text

  IMPORT_NAME              1 (json + lazy)
  IMPORT_FROM              1 (dumps)

.. code-block:: python

  lazy import json
  x = json  # Module-level access

Generates:

.. code-block:: text

  LOAD_NAME                0 (json)

.. code-block:: python

  lazy import json

  def use_json():
      return json.dumps({})  # Function scope

Before any calls:

.. code-block:: text

  LOAD_GLOBAL              0 (json)
  LOAD_ATTR                2 (dumps)

After several calls, ``LOAD_GLOBAL`` specializes to ``LOAD_GLOBAL_MODULE``:

.. code-block:: text

  LOAD_GLOBAL_MODULE       0 (json)
  LOAD_ATTR_MODULE         2 (dumps)


Lazy imports filter
-------------------

This PEP adds two new functions to the ``sys`` module to manage the lazy
imports filter:

* ``sys.set_lazy_imports_filter(func)`` - Sets the filter function. The
  ``func`` parameter must have the signature: ``func(importer: str, name: str,
  fromlist: tuple[str, ...] | None) -> bool``

* ``sys.get_lazy_imports_filter()`` - Returns the currently installed filter
  function, or ``None`` if no filter is set.

The filter function is called for every potentially lazy import, and must
return ``True`` if the import should be lazy. This allows for fine-grained
control over which imports should be lazy, useful for excluding modules with
known side-effect dependencies or registration patterns.

The filter mechanism serves as a foundation that tools, debuggers, linters,
and other ecosystem utilities can leverage to provide better lazy import
experiences. For example, static analysis tools could detect modules with side
effects and automatically configure appropriate filters. **In the future**
(out of scope for this PEP), this foundation may enable better ways to
declaratively specify which modules are safe for lazy importing, such as
package metadata, type stubs with lazy-safety annotations, or configuration
files. The current filter API is designed to be flexible enough to accommodate
such future enhancements without requiring changes to the core language
specification.

Example:

.. code-block:: python

  import sys

  def exclude_side_effect_modules(importer, name, fromlist):
      """
      Filter function to exclude modules with import-time side effects.

      Args:
          importer: Name of the module doing the import
          name: Name of the module being imported
          fromlist: Tuple of names being imported (for 'from' imports), or None

      Returns:
          True to allow lazy import, False to force eager import
      """
      # Modules known to have important import-time side effects
      side_effect_modules = {'legacy_plugin_system', 'metrics_collector'}

      if name in side_effect_modules:
          return False  # Force eager import

      return True  # Allow lazy import

  # Install the filter
  sys.set_lazy_imports_filter(exclude_side_effect_modules)

  # These imports are checked by the filter
  lazy import data_processor        # Filter returns True -> stays lazy
  lazy import legacy_plugin_system  # Filter returns False -> imported eagerly

  print('data_processor' in sys.modules)       # False - still lazy
  print('legacy_plugin_system' in sys.modules) # True - loaded eagerly

  # First use of data_processor triggers loading
  result = data_processor.transform(data)
  print('data_processor' in sys.modules)       # True - now loaded

Global lazy imports control
----------------------------

The global lazy imports flag can be controlled through:

* The ``-X lazy_imports=<mode>`` command-line option
* The ``PYTHON_LAZY_IMPORTS=<mode>`` environment variable
* The ``sys.set_lazy_imports(mode)`` function (primarily for testing)

Where ``<mode>`` can be:

* ``"default"`` (or unset): Only explicitly marked lazy imports are lazy

* ``"enabled"``: All module-level imports (except in ``try``  or ``with``
  blocks and ``import *``) become *potentially lazy*

* ``"disabled"``: No imports are lazy, even those explicitly marked with
  ``lazy`` keyword

When the global flag is set to ``"enabled"``, all imports at the global level
of all modules are *potentially lazy* **except** for those inside a ``try`` or
``with`` block or any wild card (``from ... import *``) import.

If the global lazy imports flag is set to ``"disabled"``, no *potentially
lazy* import is ever imported lazily, the import filter is never called, and
the behavior is equivalent to a regular ``import`` statement: the import is
*eager* (as if the lazy keyword was not used).

Python code can run the :func:`!sys.set_lazy_imports` function to override
the state of the global lazy imports flag inherited from the environment or CLI.
This is especially useful if an application needs to ensure that all imports
are evaluated eagerly, via ``sys.set_lazy_imports('disabled')``.


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Lazy imports are **opt-in**. Existing programs continue to run unchanged
unless a project explicitly enables laziness (via ``lazy`` syntax,
:data:`!__lazy_modules__`, or an interpreter-wide switch).

Unchanged semantics
-------------------

* Regular ``import`` and ``from ... import ...`` statements remain eager
  unless explicitly made *potentially lazy* by the local or global mechanisms
  provided.
* Dynamic import APIs remain eager and unchanged: ``__import__()`` and
  ``importlib.import_module()``.
* Import hooks and loaders continue to run under the standard import protocol
  when a lazy object is reified.

Observable behavioral shifts (opt-in only)
------------------------------------------

These changes are limited to bindings explicitly made lazy:

* **Error timing.** Exceptions that would have occurred during an eager import
  (for example ``ImportError`` or ``AttributeError`` for a missing member) now
  occur at the first *use* of the lazy name.

  .. code-block:: python

    # With eager import - error at import statement
    import broken_module  # ImportError raised here

    # With lazy import - error deferred
    lazy import broken_module
    print("Import succeeded")
    broken_module.foo()  # ImportError raised here on first use

* **Side-effect timing.** Import-time side effects in lazily imported modules
  occur at first use of the binding, not at module import time.
* **Import order.** Because modules are imported on first use, the order in
  which modules are imported may differ from how they appear in code.
* **Presence in ``sys.modules``.** A lazily imported module does not appear in
  ``sys.modules`` until first use. After reification, it must appear in
  ``sys.modules``. If some other code eagerly imports the same module before
  first use, the lazy binding resolves to that existing (lazy) module object
  when it is first used.
* **Proxy visibility.** Before first use, the bound name refers to a lazy
  proxy. Indirect introspection that touches the value may observe a proxy
  lazy object representation. After first use, the name is rebound to the real
  object and becomes indistinguishable from an eager import.

Thread-safety and reification
-----------------------------

First use of a lazy binding follows the existing import-lock discipline.
Exactly one thread performs the import and **atomically rebinds** the
importing module's global to the resolved object. Concurrent readers
thereafter observe the real object.

Lazy imports are thread-safe and have no special considerations for
free-threading. A module that would normally be imported in the main thread
may be imported in a different thread if that thread triggers the first access
to the lazy import. This is not a problem: the import lock ensures thread
safety regardless of which thread performs the import.

Subinterpreters are supported. Each subinterpreter maintains its own
``sys.lazy_modules`` and import state, so lazy imports in one subinterpreter
do not affect others.

Typing and tools
----------------

Type checkers and static analyzers may treat ``lazy`` imports as ordinary
imports for name resolution. At runtime, annotation-only imports can be marked
``lazy`` to avoid startup overhead. IDEs and debuggers should be prepared to
display lazy proxies before first use and the real objects thereafter.


Security Implications
=====================

There are no known security vulnerabilities introduced by lazy imports.

How to Teach This
=================

The new ``lazy`` keyword will be documented as part of the language standard.

As this feature is opt-in, new Python users should be able to continue using
the language as they are used to. For experienced developers, we expect them
to leverage lazy imports for the variety of benefits listed above (decreased
latency, decreased memory usage, etc) on a case-by-case basis. Developers
interested in the performance of their Python binary will likely leverage
profiling to understand the import time overhead in their codebase and mark
the necessary imports as ``lazy``. In addition, developers can mark imports
that will only be used for type annotations as ``lazy``.

Below is guidance on how to best take advantage of lazy imports and how to
avoid incompatibilities:

* When adopting lazy imports, users should be aware that eliding an import
  until it is used will result in side effects not being executed. In turn,
  users should be wary of modules that rely on import time side effects.
  Perhaps the most common reliance on import side effects is the registry
  pattern, where population of some external registry happens implicitly
  during the importing of modules, often via decorators but sometimes
  implemented via metaclasses or ``__init_subclass__``. Instead, registries of
  objects should be constructed via explicit discovery processes (e.g. a
  well-known function to call).

  .. code-block:: python

    # Problematic: Plugin registers itself on import
    # my_plugin.py
    from plugin_registry import register_plugin

    @register_plugin("MyPlugin")
    class MyPlugin:
        pass

    # In main code:
    lazy import my_plugin
    # Plugin NOT registered yet - module not loaded!

    # Better: Explicit discovery
    # plugin_registry.py
    def discover_plugins():
        from my_plugin import MyPlugin
        register_plugin(MyPlugin)

    # In main code:
    plugin_registry.discover_plugins()  # Explicit loading

* Always import needed submodules explicitly. It is not enough to rely on a
  different import to ensure a module has its submodules as attributes.
  Plainly, unless there is an explicit ``from . import bar`` in
  ``foo/__init__.py``, always use ``import foo.bar; foo.bar.Baz``, not
  ``import foo; foo.bar.Baz``. The latter only works (unreliably) because the
  attribute ``foo.bar`` is added as a side effect of ``foo.bar`` being
  imported somewhere else.

* Users who are moving imports into functions to improve startup time, should
  instead consider keeping them where they are but adding the ``lazy``
  keyword. This allows them to keep dependencies clear and avoid the overhead
  of repeatedly re-resolving the import but will still speed up the program.

  .. code-block:: python

    # Before: Inline import (repeated overhead)
    def process_data(data):
        import json  # Re-resolved on every call
        return json.dumps(data)

    # After: Lazy import at module level
    lazy import json

    def process_data(data):
        return json.dumps(data)  # Loaded once on first call

* Avoid using wild card (star) imports, as those are always eager.

FAQ
===

How does this differ from the rejected PEP 690?
-----------------------------------------------

PEP 810 takes an explicit, opt-in approach instead of :pep:`690`'s implicit
global approach. The key differences are:

- **Explicit syntax**: ``lazy import foo`` clearly marks which imports are
  lazy.
- **Local scope**: Laziness only affects the specific import statement, not
  cascading to dependencies.
- **Simpler implementation**: Uses proxy objects instead of modifying core
  dictionary behavior.

What happens when lazy imports encounter errors?
------------------------------------------------

Import errors (``ImportError``, ``ModuleNotFoundError``, syntax errors) are
deferred until first use of the lazy name. This is similar to moving an import
into a function. The error will occur with a clear traceback pointing to the
first access of the lazy object.

The implementation provides enhanced error reporting through exception
chaining. When a lazy import fails during reification, the original exception
is preserved and chained, showing both where the import was defined and where
it was first used:

.. code-block:: pytb

  Traceback (most recent call last):
    File "test.py", line 1, in <module>
      lazy import broken_module
  ImportError: lazy import of 'broken_module' raised an exception during resolution

  The above exception was the direct cause of the following exception:

  Traceback (most recent call last):
    File "test.py", line 3, in <module>
      broken_module.foo()
      ^^^^^^^^^^^^^
    File "broken_module.py", line 2, in <module>
      1/0
  ZeroDivisionError: division by zero

How do lazy imports affect modules with import-time side effects?
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Side effects are deferred until first use. This is generally desirable for
performance, but may require code changes for modules that rely on import-time
registration patterns. We recommend:

- Use explicit initialization functions instead of import-time side effects
- Call initialization functions explicitly when needed
- Avoid relying on import order for side effects

Can I use lazy imports with ``from ... import ...`` statements?
---------------------------------------------------------------

Yes, as long as you don't use ``from ... import *``. Both ``lazy import
foo`` and ``lazy from foo import bar`` are supported. The ``bar`` name will be
bound to a lazy object that resolves to ``foo.bar`` on first use.

Does ``lazy from module import Class`` load the entire module or just the class?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It loads the **entire module**, not just the class. This is because
Python's import system always executes the complete module file -- there's no
mechanism to execute only part of a ``.py`` file. When you first access
``Class``, Python:

1. Loads and executes the entire ``module.py`` file
2. Extracts the ``Class`` attribute from the resulting module object
3. Binds ``Class`` to the name in your namespace

This is identical to eager ``from module import Class`` behavior. The only
difference with lazy imports is that steps 1-3 happen on first use instead of
at the import statement.

.. code-block:: python

  # heavy_module.py
  print("Loading heavy_module")  # This ALWAYS runs when module loads

  class MyClass:
      pass

  class UnusedClass:
      pass  # Also gets defined, even though we don't import it

  # app.py
  lazy from heavy_module import MyClass

  print("Import statement done")  # heavy_module not loaded yet
  obj = MyClass()                  # NOW "Loading heavy_module" prints
                                   # (and UnusedClass gets defined too)

**Key point**: Lazy imports defer *when* a module loads, not *what* gets
loaded. You cannot selectively load only parts of a module -- Python's import
system doesn't support partial module execution.

What about type annotations and ``TYPE_CHECKING`` imports?
----------------------------------------------------------

Lazy imports eliminate the common need for ``TYPE_CHECKING`` guards. You
can write:

.. code-block:: python

  lazy from collections.abc import Sequence, Mapping  # No runtime cost

  def process(items: Sequence[str]) -> Mapping[str, int]:
      ...

Instead of:

.. code-block:: python

  from typing import TYPE_CHECKING
  if TYPE_CHECKING:
      from collections.abc import Sequence, Mapping

  def process(items: Sequence[str]) -> Mapping[str, int]:
      ...

What's the performance overhead of lazy imports?
------------------------------------------------

The overhead is minimal:

- Zero overhead after first use thanks to the adaptive interpreter optimizing
  the slow path away.
- Small one-time cost to create the proxy object.
- Reification (first use) has the same cost as a regular import.
- No ongoing performance penalty.

Benchmarking with the `pyperformance suite`_ shows the implementation is
performance neutral when lazy imports are not used.

.. _pyperformance suite: https://github.com/facebookexperimental/
    free-threading-benchmarking/blob/main/results/bm-20250922-3.15.0a0-27836e5/
    bm-20250922-vultr-x86_64-DinoV-lazy_imports-3.15.0a0-27836e5-vs-base.svg

Can I mix lazy and eager imports of the same module?
----------------------------------------------------

Yes. If module ``foo`` is imported both lazily and eagerly in the same
program, the eager import takes precedence and both bindings resolve to the
same module object.

How do I migrate existing code to use lazy imports?
---------------------------------------------------

Migration is incremental:

1. Identify slow-loading modules using profiling tools.
2. Add ``lazy`` keyword to imports that aren't needed immediately.
3. Test that side-effect timing changes don't break functionality.
4. Use :data:`!__lazy_modules__` for compatibility with older Python versions.

What about star imports (``from module import *``)?
---------------------------------------------------

Wild card (star) imports cannot be lazy - they remain eager. This is
because the set of names being imported cannot be determined without loading
the module. Using the ``lazy`` keyword with star imports will be a syntax
error. If lazy imports are globally enabled, star imports will still be eager.

How do lazy imports interact with import hooks and custom loaders?
------------------------------------------------------------------

Import hooks and loaders work normally. When a lazy object is first used,
the standard import protocol runs, including any custom hooks or loaders that
were in place at reification time.

What happens in multi-threaded environments?
--------------------------------------------

Lazy import reification is thread-safe. Only one thread will perform the
actual import, and the binding is atomically updated. Other threads will see
either the lazy proxy or the final resolved object.

Can I force reification of a lazy import without using it?
----------------------------------------------------------

Yes, accessing a module's ``__dict__`` will reify all lazy objects in that
module. Individual lazy objects can be resolved by calling their ``get()``
method.

What's the difference between ``globals()`` and ``mod.__dict__`` for lazy imports?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Calling ``globals()`` returns the module's dictionary without reifying lazy
imports -- you'll see lazy proxy objects when accessing them through the
returned dictionary. However, accessing ``mod.__dict__`` from external code
reifies all lazy imports in that module first. This design ensures:

.. code-block:: python

  # In your module:
  lazy import json

  g = globals()
  print(type(g['json']))  # <class 'lazy_import'> - your problem

  # From external code:
  import sys
  mod = sys.modules['your_module']
  d = mod.__dict__
  print(type(d['json']))  # <class 'module'> - reified for external access

This distinction means adding lazy imports and calling ``globals()`` is your
responsibility to manage, while external code accessing ``mod.__dict__``
always sees fully loaded modules.

Why not use ``importlib.util.LazyLoader`` instead?
--------------------------------------------------

``LazyLoader`` has significant limitations:

- Requires verbose setup code for each lazy import.
- Doesn't work well with ``from ... import`` statements.
- Less clear and standard than dedicated syntax.

Will this break tools like ``isort`` or ``black``?
--------------------------------------------------

Linters, formatters, and other tools will need updates to recognize
the ``lazy`` keyword, but the changes should be minimal since the import
structure remains the same. The keyword appears at the beginning,
making it easy to parse.

How do I know if a library is compatible with lazy imports?
-----------------------------------------------------------

Most libraries should work fine with lazy imports. Libraries that might
have issues:

- Those with essential import-time side effects (registration,
  monkey-patching).
- Those that expect specific import ordering.
- Those that modify global state during import.

When in doubt, test lazy imports with your specific use cases.

What happens if I globally enable lazy imports mode and a library doesn't work correctly?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Note: This is an advanced feature.* You can use the lazy imports filter to
exclude specific modules that are known to have problematic side effects:

.. code-block:: python

  import sys

  def my_filter(importer, name, fromlist):
      # Don't lazily import modules known to have side effects
      if name in {'problematic_module', 'another_module'}:
          return False  # Import eagerly
      return True  # Allow lazy import

  sys.set_lazy_imports_filter(my_filter)

The filter function receives the importer module name, the module being
imported, and the fromlist (if using ``from ... import``). Returning ``False``
forces an eager import.

Alternatively, set the global mode to ``"disabled"`` via ``-X
lazy_imports=disabled`` to turn off all lazy imports for debugging.

Can I use lazy imports inside functions?
----------------------------------------

No, the ``lazy`` keyword is only allowed at module level. For
function-level lazy loading, use traditional inline imports or move the import
to module level with ``lazy``.

What about forwards compatibility with older Python versions?
-------------------------------------------------------------

Use the :data:`!__lazy_modules__` global for compatibility:

.. code-block:: python

  # Works on Python 3.15+ as lazy, eager on older versions
  __lazy_modules__ = ['expensive_module', 'expensive_module_2']
  import expensive_module
  from expensive_module_2 import MyClass

The :data:`!__lazy_modules__` attribute is a list of module name strings. When
an import statement is executed, Python checks if the module name being
imported appears in :data:`!__lazy_modules__`. If it does, the import is
treated as if it had the ``lazy`` keyword (becoming *potentially lazy*). On
Python versions before 3.15 that don't support lazy imports, the
:data:`!__lazy_modules__` attribute is simply ignored and imports proceed
eagerly as normal.

This provides a migration path until you can rely on the ``lazy`` keyword. For
maximum predictability, it's recommended to define :data:`!__lazy_modules__`
once, before any imports. But as it is checked on each import, it can be
modified between ``import`` statements.

How do explicit lazy imports interact with PEP 649 and PEP 749?
---------------------------------------------------------------

Python 3.14 implemented deferred evaluation of annotations,
as specified by :pep:`649` and :pep:`749`.
If an annotation is not stringified, it is an expression that is evaluated
at a later time. It will only be resolved if the annotation is accessed. In
the example below, the ``fake_typing`` module is only loaded when the user
inspects the ``__annotations__`` dictionary. The ``fake_typing`` module would
also be loaded if the user uses ``annotationlib.get_annotations()`` or
``getattr`` to access the annotations.

.. code-block:: python

  lazy from fake_typing import MyFakeType
  def foo(x: MyFakeType):
    pass
  print(foo.__annotations__)  # Triggers loading the fake_typing module

How do lazy imports interact with ``dir()``, ``getattr()``, and module introspection?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Accessing lazy imports through normal attribute access or ``getattr()``
will trigger reification. Calling ``dir()`` on a module will reify all lazy
imports in that module to ensure the directory listing is complete. This is
similar to accessing ``mod.__dict__``.

.. code-block:: python

  lazy import json

  # Before any access
  # json not in sys.modules

  # Any of these trigger reification:
  dumps_func = json.dumps
  dumps_func = getattr(json, 'dumps')
  dir(json)
  # Now json is in sys.modules

Do lazy imports work with circular imports?
-------------------------------------------

Lazy imports don't automatically solve circular import problems. If two
modules have a circular dependency, making the imports lazy might help **only
if** the circular reference isn't accessed during module initialization.
However, if either module accesses the other during import time, you'll still
get an error.

**Example that works** (deferred access in functions):

.. code-block:: python

  # user_model.py
  lazy import post_model

  class User:
      def get_posts(self):
          # OK - post_model accessed inside function, not during import
          return post_model.Post.get_by_user(self.name)

  # post_model.py
  lazy import user_model

  class Post:
      @staticmethod
      def get_by_user(username):
          return f"Posts by {username}"

This works because neither module accesses the other at module level -- the
access happens later when ``get_posts()`` is called.

**Example that fails** (access during import):

.. code-block:: python

  # module_a.py
  lazy import module_b

  result = module_b.get_value()  # Error! Accessing during import

  def func():
      return "A"

  # module_b.py
  lazy import module_a

  result = module_a.func()  # Circular dependency error here

  def get_value():
      return "B"

This fails because ``module_a`` tries to access ``module_b`` at import time,
which then tries to access ``module_a`` before it's fully initialized.

The best practice is still to avoid circular imports in your code design.

Will lazy imports affect the performance of my hot paths?
---------------------------------------------------------

After first use, lazy imports have **zero overhead** thanks to the adaptive
interpreter. The interpreter specializes the bytecode (e.g., ``LOAD_GLOBAL``
becomes ``LOAD_GLOBAL_MODULE``) which eliminates the lazy check on subsequent
accesses. This means once a lazy import is reified, accessing it is just as
fast as a normal import.

.. code-block:: python

  lazy import json

  def use_json():
      return json.dumps({"test": 1})

  # First call triggers reification
  use_json()

  # After 2-3 calls, bytecode is specialized
  use_json()
  use_json()

You can observe the specialization using ``dis.dis(use_json, adaptive=True)``:

.. code-block:: text

  === Before specialization ===
  LOAD_GLOBAL              0 (json)
  LOAD_ATTR                2 (dumps)

  === After 3 calls (specialized) ===
  LOAD_GLOBAL_MODULE       0 (json)
  LOAD_ATTR_MODULE         2 (dumps)

The specialized ``LOAD_GLOBAL_MODULE`` and ``LOAD_ATTR_MODULE`` instructions
are optimized fast paths with no overhead for checking lazy imports.

What about ``sys.modules``? When does a lazy import appear there?
-----------------------------------------------------------------

A lazily imported module does **not** appear in ``sys.modules`` until it's
reified (first used). Once reified, it appears in ``sys.modules`` just like
any eager import.

.. code-block:: python

  import sys
  lazy import json

  print('json' in sys.modules)  # False

  result = json.dumps({"key": "value"})  # First use

  print('json' in sys.modules)  # True

Does ``lazy from __future__ import feature`` work?
--------------------------------------------------

No, future imports can't be lazy because they're parser/compiler directives.
It's technically possible for the runtime behavior to be lazy but there's no
real value in it.

Why you chose ``lazy`` as the keyword name?
-------------------------------------------

Not "why"... memorize! :)

Alternate Implementation Ideas
==============================

Here are some alternative design decisions that were considered during the
development of this PEP. While the current proposal represents what we believe
to be the best balance of simplicity, performance, and maintainability, these
alternatives offer different trade-offs that may be valuable for implementers
to consider or for future refinements.

Leveraging a subclass of dict
-----------------------------

Instead of updating the internal dict object to directly add the fields needed
to support lazy imports, we could create a subclass of the dict object to be
used specifically for Lazy Import enablement. This would still be a leaky
abstraction though - methods can be called directly such as
``dict.__getitem__`` and it would impact the performance of globals lookup in
the interpreter.

Alternate keyword names
-----------------------

For this PEP, we decided to propose ``lazy`` for the explicit keyword as it
felt the most familar to those already focused on optimizing import overhead.
We also considered a variety of other options to support explicit lazy
imports. The most compelling alternates were ``defer`` and ``delay``.


Rejected Ideas
==============

Making the new behavior the default
-----------------------------------

Changing ``import`` to be lazy by default is outside of the scope of this PEP.
From the discussion on :pep:`690` it is clear that this is a fairly
contentious idea, although perhaps once we have wide-spread use of lazy
imports this can be reconsidered.

Modification of the dict object
-------------------------------

The initial PEP for lazy imports (PEP 690) relied heavily on the modification
of the internal dict object to support lazy imports. We recognize that this
data structure is highly tuned, heavily used across the codebase, and very
performance sensitive. Because of the importance of this data structure and
the desire to keep the implementation of lazy imports encapsulated from users
who may have no interest in the feature, we've decided to invest in an
alternate approach.

The dictionary is the foundational data structure in Python. Every object's
attributes are stored in a dict, and dicts are used throughout the runtime for
namespaces, keyword arguments, and more. Adding any kind of hook or special
behavior to dicts to support lazy imports would:

1. Prevent critical interpreter optimizations including future JIT
   compilation.
2. Add complexity to a data structure that must remain simple and fast.
3. Affect every part of Python, not just import behavior.
4. Violate separation of concerns -- the hash table shouldn't know about the
   import system.

Past decisions that violated this principle of keeping core abstractions clean
have caused significant pain in the CPython ecosystem, making optimization
difficult and introducing subtle bugs.

Making ``lazy`` imports find the module without loading it
----------------------------------------------------------

The Python ``import`` machinery separates out finding a module and loading
it, and the lazy import implementation could technically defer only the
loading part. However:

- Finding the module does not guarantee the import will succeed, nor even
  that it will not raise ImportError.
- Finding modules in packages requires that those packages are loaded, so
  it would only help with lazy loading one level of a package hierarchy.
- Since "finding" attributes in modules *requires* loading them, this would
  create a hard to explain difference between
  ``from package import module`` and ``from module import function``.
- A significant part of the performance win is skipping the finding part
  (which may involve filesystem searches and consulting multiple importers
  and meta-importers).

Placing the ``lazy`` keyword in the middle of from imports
----------------------------------------------------------

While we found ``from foo lazy import bar`` to be a really intuitive placement
for the new explicit syntax, we quickly learned that placing the ``lazy``
keyword here is already syntactically allowed in Python. This is because
``from . lazy import bar`` is legal syntax (because whitespace does not
matter.)

Placing the ``lazy`` keyword at the end of import statements
------------------------------------------------------------

We discussed appending lazy to the end of import statements like such ``import
foo lazy`` or ``from foo import bar, baz lazy`` but ultimately decided that
this approach provided less clarity. For example, if multiple modules are
imported in a single statement, it is unclear if the lazy binding applies to
all of the imported objects or just a subset of the items.

Adding an explicit ``eager`` keyword
------------------------------------

Since we're not changing the default behavior, and we don't want to
encourage use of the global flags, it's too early to consider adding
superfluous syntax for the common, default case. It would create too much
confusion about what the default is, or when the ``eager`` keyword would be
necessary, or whether it affects lazy imports *in* the explicitly eagerly
imported module.

Allowing the filter to force lazy imports even when globally disabled
---------------------------------------------------------------------

As lazy imports allow some forms of circular imports that would otherwise
fail, as an intentional and desireable thing (especially for typing-related
imports), the suggestion was made to add a way to override the global
disable, like allowing the lazy imports filter to override the global
disable the way it can override a global enable. The risk here is that we
end up in a confusing situation where some things are overridden and others
are not depending on the relevant priority as we perceive them now, and that
we'll need new ways to disable or enable as the use of lazy imports evolves.
The global disable is not expected to see commonplace use, but be more of a
debugging and selective testing tool for those who want to tightly control
their dependency on lazy imports. We don't think it's unreasonable for
package mantainers, as they update packages to adopt lazy imports, to decide
to *not* support running with lazy imports globally disabled.

It may be that this means that in time, as more and more packages embrace
both typing and lazy imports, the global disable becomes mostly unused and
unusable. Similar things have happened in the past with other global flags,
and given the low cost of the flag this seems acceptable. It's also a easier
to add more specific re-enabling mechanisms later, when we have a clearer
picture of real-world use and patterns, than it is to remove a hastily added
mechanism that isn't quite right.

Using a context manager instead of a new soft keyword
-----------------------------------------------------

A backward compatible syntax, for example in the form of a context manager,
has been proposed:

.. code-block:: python

  with lazy_imports(...):
      import json

This would replace the need for :data:`!__lazy_modules__`, and allow
libraries to use one of the existing lazy imports implementations in older
Python versions. However, adding magic ``with`` statements with that kind of
effect would be a signficant change to Python and ``with`` statements in
general, and it would not be easy to combine with the implementation for
lazy imports in this proposal. Adding standard library support for existing
lazy importers *without* changes to the implementation amounts to the status
quo, and does not solve the performance and usability issues with those
existing solutions.

Returning a proxy dict from ``globals()``
------------------------------------------

An alternative to reifying on ``globals()`` or exposing lazy objects would be
to return a proxy dictionary that automatically reifies lazy objects when
they're accessed through the proxy. This would seemingly give the best of both
worlds: ``globals()`` returns immediately without reification cost, but
accessing items through the result would automatically resolve lazy imports.

However, this approach is fundamentally incompatible with how ``globals()`` is
used in practice. Many standard library functions and built-ins expect
``globals()`` to return a real ``dict`` object, not a proxy:

- ``exec(code, globals())`` requires a real dict.
- ``eval(expr, globals())`` requires a real dict.
- Functions that check ``type(globals()) is dict`` would break.
- Dictionary methods like ``.update()`` would need special handling.
- Performance would suffer from the indirection on every access.

The proxy would need to be so transparent that it would be indistinguishable
from a real dict in almost all cases, which is extremely difficult to achieve
correctly. Any deviation from true dict behavior would be a source of subtle
bugs.

Reifying lazy imports when ``globals()`` is called
---------------------------------------------------

Calling ``globals()`` returns the module's namespace dictionary without
triggering reification of lazy imports. Accessing lazy objects through the
returned dictionary yields the lazy proxy objects themselves. This is an
intentional design decision for several reasons:

**The key distinction**: Adding a lazy import and calling ``globals()`` is the
module author's concern and under their control. However, accessing
``mod.__dict__`` from external code is a different scenario -- it crosses
module boundaries and affects someone else's code. Therefore, ``mod.__dict__``
access reifies all lazy imports to ensure external code sees fully realized
modules, while ``globals()`` preserves lazy objects for the module's own
introspection needs.

**Technical challenges**: It is impossible to safely reify on-demand when
``globals()`` is called because we cannot return a proxy dictionary -- this
would break common usages like passing the result to ``exec()`` or other
built-ins that expect a real dictionary. The only alternative would be to
eagerly reify all lazy imports whenever ``globals()`` is called, but this
behavior would be surprising and potentially expensive.

**Performance concerns**: It is impractical to cache whether a reification
scan has been performed with just the globals dictionary reference, whereas
module attribute access (the primary use case) can efficiently cache
reification state in the module object itself.

**Use case rationale**: The chosen design makes sense precisely because of
this distinction: adding a lazy import and calling ``globals()`` is your
problem to manage, while having lazy imports visible in ``mod.__dict__``
becomes someone else's problem. By reifying on ``__dict__`` access but not on
``globals()``, we ensure external code always sees fully loaded modules while
giving module authors control over their own introspection.

Note that three options were considered:

1. Calling ``globals()`` or ``mod.__dict__`` traverses and resolves all lazy
   objects before returning.
2. Calling ``globals()`` or ``mod.__dict__`` returns the dictionary with lazy
   objects present.
3. Calling ``globals()`` returns the dictionary with lazy objects, but
   ``mod.__dict__`` reifies everything.

We chose the third option because it properly delineates responsibility: if
you add lazy imports to your module and call ``globals()``, you're responsible
for handling the lazy objects. But external code accessing your module's
``__dict__`` shouldn't need to know about your lazy imports -- it gets fully
resolved modules.

Acknowledgements
================

We would like to thank Paul Ganssle, Yury Selivanov, Łukasz Langa, Lysandros
Nikolaou, Pradyun Gedam, Mark Shannon, Hana Joo and the Python Google team,
the Python team(s) @ Meta, the Python @ HRT team, the Bloomberg Python team,
the Scientific Python community, everyone who participated in the initial
discussion of :pep:`690`, and many others who provided valuable feedback and
insights that helped shape this PEP.


Footnotes
=========

.. [#f1] Furthermore, there's also external tooling, in the form of
   `flake8-type-checking <https://pypi.org/project/flake8-type-checking/>`_,
   because it is common for developers to mislocate imports and accidentally
   introduce a runtime dependency on an import only imported in such a block.
   Ironically, the static type checker is of no help in these circumstances.


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
