PEP: 824
Title: Coalescing operators
Author: Marc Mueller
Sponsor: Guido van Rossum <guido@python.org>
Discussions-To: Pending
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Created: 31-Jan-2025
Python-Version: 3.16


Abstract
========

This PEP proposes adding two new operators.

* The "``None``-coalescing" operator ``??``
* The "Coalescing assignment" operator ``??=``

The ``None``-coalescing operator evaluates the left hand side,
checks if it is ``not None`` and, if so, returns the result. If the
value is ``None``, the right hand side is evaluated and returned.

The coalescing assignment operator will only assign the right hand side
to the left hand side if the left hand side evaluates to ``None``.

They are roughly equivalent to:

.. code-block:: python

    # a ?? b
    _t if ((_t := a) is not None) else b

    # a ??= b
    if a is None:
        a = b

See the `Specification`_ section for more details.


Motivation
==========

First officially proposed ten years ago in (the now deferred) :pep:`505`,
the idea to add ``None``-coalescing operators has been along for some
time now, discussed at length in numerous threads, most recently in
[#discuss_revisit_505]_. This PEP aims to capture the current state of
discussion and proposes a specification for addition to the Python
language. In contrast to :pep:`505`, it will only focus on the two
``None``-coalescing operators. See the `Deferred Ideas`_ section for
more details.

``None``-coalescing operators are not a new invention. Several other
modern programming languages have so called "``null`` coalescing"
operators, including TypeScript [#ts]_, ECMAScript (a.k.a. JavaScript)
[#js_1]_ [#js_2]_, C# [#csharp]_, Dart [#dart_1]_ [#dart_2]_,
Swift [#swift]_, Kotlin [#kotlin]_, PHP [#php_1]_ [#php_2]_ and more.

The general idea is to provide a comparison operator, similar to ``or``,
which instead of truthiness, checks for ``None`` values.

Explicit checks for ``None``
----------------------------

While some data types support inherit default values, e.g. an empty
string or collection literal, for others the default value could
itself be a valid value, e.g. ``0``. Furthermore, custom types
often do not have default values either. To denote the absence of
a value, it is therefore common in Python to use the builtin sentinel
``None``. Any code working with such functions either does some kind of
validation to make sure a valid value is actual returned, maybe
returning early or rasing an exception if it is not, or provides
a default / fallback value. To do this, it is common to use
``is not None`` checks.

.. code-block:: python

    class User:
        name: str | None
        def get_age(self) -> int | None: ...

    def show_user_age(user: User):
        if user.get_age() is not None:
            age = user.get_age()
        else:
            age = "unknown"
        print(f"The user age is {age}")

Though the intent is clear, it is quite verbose. Additionally, it is
not uncommon to repeat the value expression, like in the example above,
instead of assigning it to a temporary variable first. This could cause
problems if the value expression has side effects which would be
executed twice now.

It is possible to write this in a more concise form using an
assignment expression. However, it is arguably a bit more difficult
to see what is going on here at first glance.

.. code-block:: python

    def show_user_age(user: User):
        age = (val := user.get_age()) if val is not None else "unknown"
        print(f"The user age is {age}")

An issue both options have in common is that there is not a single
agreed upon way to write these statements / expressions. Instead of
putting the value first, some might prefer to invert the check to use
``is None`` instead. Readers need to constantly be aware of this,
increasing the mental load.

Using the "``None``-coalescing" operator ``??`` instead, helps to keep
the expression short and predictable while still clearly communicating
the intent.

::

    def show_user_age(user: User):
        age = user.get_age() ?? "unknown"
        print(f"The user age is {age}")

Overwrite ``None`` values
-------------------------

Sometimes it might be necessary to assign a fallback value inside an
object. To do so, the expression is usually written twice. Once for
the ``is None`` check, and again for the assignment.

.. code-block:: python

    def set_user_name(user: User):
        if user.name is None:
            user.name = "unknown"

Using the "``None``-coalesce assignment" operator ``??=`` helps to
avoid repeating the expression. Especially for more complex once,
this will make it easier to read and write.

::

    def set_user_name(user: User):
        user.name ??= "unknown"

Defaults for function arguments
-------------------------------

Function argument defaults are evaluated in the parent scope.
That is a common issue in cases where the default value is a
mutable object or depends on the function context itself.
In these cases, a typical solution is to allow ``None`` as argument
and assign the fallback value inside the function itself.

.. code-block:: python

    def show_user_name(user: User | None):
        if user is None:
            user = create_default_user()
        print(f"The user name is {user.name}")

This could be rewritten as:

::

    def show_user_name(user: User | None):
        user ??= create_default_user()
        print(f"The user name is {user.name}")


Specification
=============

The ``None``-coalescing operator
--------------------------------

The ``??`` operator is added. It first evaluates the left hand side.
The result is cached, so that the expression is not evaluated again.
If the value is ``not None``, it is returned. If it is ``None``, the
right hand side expression is evaluated and returned instead.

.. code-block:: python

    # a ?? b
    _t if ((_t := a) is not None) else b

Precedence
**********

The precedence of ``??`` will be between ``or`` and conditional
expressions. Parentheses can be added as necessary to modify the
precedence in individual expressions. A few examples of how
implicit parentheses would be placed:

::

    # "" or None ?? 2
    ("" or None) ?? 2

    # "Hello" if None ?? True else 0
    "Hello" if (None ?? True) else 0

AST changes
***********

A new ``CoalesceOp`` AST node is added. Similarly to ``BoolOp``, it
stores a sequence of subexpressions as ``values``.

::

    expr = BoolOp(boolop op, expr* values)
        | CoalesceOp(expr* values)
        | ...


Grammar changes
***************

A new ``??`` token is added, as well as a new ``coalesce`` rule. Every
rule which previously referenced the ``disjunction`` rule is updated
to refer to the ``coalesce`` rule instead.

.. code-block:: PEG

    coalesce:
        | disjunction ('??' disjunction)+
        | disjunction

    disjunction:
        | conjunction ('or' conjunction)+
        | conjunction


The ``Coalescing`` assignment operator
--------------------------------------

The ``??=`` operator is added. It performs a conditional assignment.
As such it will first evaluate the left hand side and check that the
value is ``None`` and only then assign the result from the right hand
side. If the first value is ``not None``,  the assignment is skipped.

.. code-block:: python

    # a ??= b
    if a is None:
        a = b

AST changes
***********

A new ``CoalesceAssign`` AST node is added. Similarly to ``AugAssign``,
it stores a ``target`` and ``value`` expression.

::

    stmt = ...
        | AugAssign(expr target, operator op, expr value)
        ...
        | CoalesceAssign(expr target, expr value)

Grammar changes
***************

A new ``??=`` token is added. Additionally, the ``assignment`` rule
is extended to include the coalesce assignment.

.. code-block:: PEG

    assignment:
        | NAME ':' expression ['=' annotated_rhs]
        | ('(' single_target ')'
            | single_subscript_attribute_target) ':' expression ['=' annotated_rhs]
        | (star_targets '=')+ annotated_rhs !'=' [TYPE_COMMENT]
        | single_target augassign ~ annotated_rhs
        | single_target '??=' ~ annotated_rhs


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

The ``None``-coalescing operators are **opt-in**. Existing programs will
continue to run as is. So far code which used either ``??`` or ``??=``
raised a ``SyntaxError``.


Security Implications
=====================

There are no new security implications from this proposal.


How to Teach This
=================

In a practical sense it might be helpful to think of the "``None``-coalescing"
operator ``??`` as a special case for the conditional ``or``
operator, with the caveat that ``??`` checks for ``is not None`` instead
of truthiness. As such it makes sense to include ``??`` when teaching
the other conditional operators ``and`` and ``or``.

While ``None`` is a convenient way to signal the absence of a value,
it is imperative to point out that it is not always the best option.
E.g. using ``""`` or an empty collection as default where appropriate,
can eliminate unnecessary code.

.. code-block:: python

    from dataclasses import dataclass, field

    @dataclass
    class User:
        phone_numbers: list[str] = field(default_factory=list)

    def show_user_phone_numbers(user: User):
        for number in user.phone_numbers:
            print(f"Phone number {number}")

Though, as explained earlier in the `Explicit checks for None`_ section,
this is not always possible in which case ``??`` is good option.

The "``None``-coalescing assignment" operator ``??=`` can be best
thought of as a conditional assignment operator. As it is closely
related to ``??``, explaining these together would make sense.
Though it looks related to binary assignment operators like ``+=``
as well, it is worth pointing out the distinction between these.
Since ``??=`` is a **conditional** assignment operator, the right
hand side will be skipped entirely in some case, while ``+=`` always
evaluates both sides.

Reading expressions
-------------------

Reading expressions out loud is always lossy. This PEP does not
intent to define an unambiguous way of speaking these operators.
The following is therefore merely meant as a suggestion.

``None``-coalescing operator
****************************

::

    user.get_age() ?? "unknown"

+--------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Pattern                  | Example                           |
+==========================+===================================+
| "... or ... if None"     | "call user dot get_age ``or``     |
|                          | unknown ``if None``"              |
+--------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| "... coalesce with ..."  | "call user dot get_age            |
|                          | ``coalesce with`` unknown"        |
+--------------------------+-----------------------------------+

``None``-coalescing assignment operator
***************************************

::

    user.name ??= "unknown"

+-----------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Pattern                     | Example                           |
+=============================+===================================+
| "if ... is None assign ..." | "``if`` user dot name ``is None`` |
|                             | ``assign`` unknown"               |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| "assign ... to ... if None" | "``assign`` unknown ``to`` user   |
|                             | dot name ``if None``"             |
+-----------------------------+-----------------------------------+


Reference Implementation
========================

A reference implementation is available at
https://github.com/cdce8p/cpython/tree/pep824-none-coalescing-operators.
A online demo can be tested at https://pep823-and-pep824-demo.pages.dev/.


Deferred Ideas
==============

``None``-aware access operators
-------------------------------

:pep:`505` also suggest the addition of the ``None``-aware access
operators ``?.`` and ``?[ ]``. As the ``None``-coalescing operators have
their own use cases, the ``None``-aware access operators were moved
into a separate document, see PEP-823. Both proposals can be adopted
independently of one another.


Rejected Ideas
==============

Add new (soft-) keyword
-----------------------

Python does have a history of preferring keywords over symbols. For
example, while a lot of languages use ``&&`` and ``||`` as conditional
operators, Python uses ``and`` and ``or`` respectively. As such it was
suggested to use a new (soft-) keyword, e.g. ``otherwise``, instead of
``??``.

While the keywords ``and`` and ``or`` help avoid ambiguity with the
binary operators ``&`` and ``|``, there is not a corresponding binary
operator for ``??``. Furthermore, both keywords are well established
in spoken and written language and as such immediately obvious to the
reader. Not to mention they are also quite short with just two and three
characters.

In comparison a new (soft-) keyword would likely not enjoy the same
benefits. There is no established short name for it, so while ideas
like ``otherwise`` could be added, they do not convey an inherit
meaning and therefore do not provide an immediate benefit. In contrast,
the ``??`` operator is well known in other major programming
languages.

Lastly, using a (soft-) keyword for the "coalescing assignment" operator
poses additional questions and readability concerns.

::

    a = otherwise b

Add ``??`` as a binary operator
-------------------------------

:pep:`505` originally suggested to add ``??`` as another binary operator.
As such it would have bound more tightly than the proposed
`specification <Precedence_>`_.

Though this would have worked fine, it would have suggested that ``??``
is similar to other binary operators like ``+`` or ``**``. This is not
the case. While binary operators first evaluate the left **and** right
hand side before performing the operation, for ``??`` only the left hand
side is evaluated if the values is ``not None``. As such the
"``None``-coalescing" operator is much more closely related to the
conditional operators ``or`` and ``and`` which also short-circuit the
expression for truthy and falsy values respectively.

Furthermore, setting the precedence between ``or`` and conditional
expressions matches other languages which have implemented the operator,
like JS [#js_precedence]_ and C# [#csharp_precedence]_.

Add ``??=`` as ``AugAssign``
----------------------------

:pep:`505` also suggested to add ``??=`` as an ``AugAssign`` node.

So far ``AugAssign`` is only used for binary operators, as such including
``??=`` which is a conditional assignment operator would be confusing.
Furthermore, ``AugAssign`` statements always evaluate the left **and**
right hand side, without any short-circuiting. This is a major
difference compared to coalescing assignments.


Common objections
=================

Just use a conditional expression
---------------------------------

The ``None``-coalescing operators can be considered syntactic sugar
for existing conditional expressions and statements. As such some
questioned whether they would add anything meaningful to the
language as a whole.

As shown in the `Motivation`_ section, there are clear benefits to
using the ``None``-coalescing operators. To summarize them again:

- They help avoid repeating the variable expression or having to
  introduce a temporary variable.

- Clear control flow, no more ``if ... is not None else ...`` and the
  inverse ``if ... is None else ...`` in the same code blocks.

- Avoids the often (mis-) used ``or`` to provide fallback values
  just for ``None``.

- More concise while also being more explicit.

Proliferation of ``None`` in code bases
---------------------------------------

One of the reasons why :pep:`505` stalled was that some expressed their
concern how ``None``-coalescing and ``None``-aware operators will affect
the code written by developers. If it is easier to work with ``None``
values, this will encourage developers to use them more. They believe that
e.g. returning an optional ``None`` value from a function is usually an
anti-pattern. In an ideal world the use of ``None`` would be limited as
much as possible, for example with early data validation.

It is certainly true that new language features affect how the language
as a whole develops. Therefore any changes should be considered carefully.
However, just because ``None`` represents an anti-pattern for some, has
not prevented the community as a whole from using it extensively. Rather
the lack of ``None``-coalescing operators has stopped developers from
writing concise expressions and instead often leads to more complex code
or such which can contain subtle errors, see the `Motivation`_ section
for more details.

``None`` is not special enough
------------------------------

Some mentioned that ``None`` is not special enough to warrant dedicated
operators.

``None``-coalescing operators have been added to a number of other modern
programming languages. Furthermore, adding ``??`` and ``??=`` is
something which was suggested numerous times since :pep:`505` was
first proposed ten years ago.

In Python ``None`` is frequently used to indicate the absence of
something better or a missing value. As such it is common to look
specifically for ``None`` values, for example, to provide a default
or fallback value.


Footnotes
=========

.. [#discuss_revisit_505] discuss.python.org: Revisiting PEP 505 - None-aware operators
   (https://discuss.python.org/t/revisiting-pep-505-none-aware-operators/74568)
.. [#ts] TypeScript: Nullish Coalescing
   (https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/release-notes/typescript-3-7.html#nullish-coalescing)
.. [#js_1] JavaScript: Nullish coalescing operator (??)
   (https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Nullish_coalescing)
.. [#js_2] JavaScript: Nullish coalescing assignment (??=)
   (https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Nullish_coalescing_assignment)
.. [#js_precedence] JavaScript: Operator precedence
   (https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Operator_precedence#table)
.. [#csharp] C# Reference: ?? and ??= operators
   (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/operators/null-coalescing-operator)
.. [#csharp_precedence] C# Reference: Operator precedence
   (https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/operators/#operator-precedence)
.. [#dart_1] Dart: Conditional expressions
   (https://dart.dev/language/operators#conditional-expressions)
.. [#dart_2] Dart: Assignment operators
   (https://dart.dev/language/operators#assignment-operators)
.. [#swift] Swift: Nil-Coalescing Operator
   (https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/documentation/the-swift-programming-language/basicoperators/#Nil-Coalescing-Operator)
.. [#kotlin] Kotlin: Elvis operator
   (https://kotlinlang.org/docs/null-safety.html#elvis-operator)
.. [#php_1] PHP: Null Coalesce Operator
   (https://wiki.php.net/rfc/isset_ternary)
.. [#php_2] PHP: Null Coalescing Assignment Operator
   (https://wiki.php.net/rfc/null_coalesce_equal_operator)


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
