PEP: 320
Title: Python 2.4 Release Schedule
Version: $Revision$
Last-Modified: $Date$
Author: Barry Warsaw, Raymond Hettinger, Anthony Baxter
Status: Final
Type: Informational
Topic: Release
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 29-Jul-2003
Python-Version: 2.4
Post-History: 01-Dec-2004


Abstract
========

This document describes the development and release schedule for
Python 2.4.  The schedule primarily concerns itself with PEP-sized
items.  Small features may be added up to and including the first
beta release.  Bugs may be fixed until the final release.

There will be at least two alpha releases, two beta releases, and
one release candidate.  The release date was 30th November, 2004.


Release Manager
===============

Anthony Baxter

Martin von Lowis is building the Windows installers, Fred the
doc packages, Sean the RPMs.


Release Schedule
================

- July 9: alpha 1 [completed]

- August 5/6: alpha 2 [completed]

- Sept 3: alpha 3 [completed]

- October 15: beta 1 [completed]

- November 3: beta 2 [completed]

- November 18: release candidate 1 [completed]

- November 30: final [completed]


Completed features for 2.4
==========================

- :pep:`218` Builtin Set Objects.

- :pep:`289` Generator expressions.

- :pep:`292` Simpler String Substitutions to be implemented as a module.

- :pep:`318`: Function/method decorator syntax, using @syntax

- :pep:`322` Reverse Iteration.

- :pep:`327`: A Decimal package for fixed precision arithmetic.

- :pep:`328`: Multi-line Imports

- Encapsulate the decorate-sort-undecorate pattern in a keyword for
  ``list.sort()``.

- Added a builtin called ``sorted()`` which may be used in expressions.

- The ``itertools`` module has two new functions, ``tee()`` and ``groupby()``.

- Add a ``collections`` module with a ``deque()`` object.

- Add two statistical/reduction functions, ``nlargest()`` and ``nsmallest()``
  to the ``heapq`` module.

- Python's windows installer now uses MSI


Deferred until 2.5
==================

- Deprecate and/or remove the modules listed in :pep:`4` (``posixfile``,
  ``gopherlib``, ``pre``, ``others``)

- Remove support for platforms as described in :pep:`11`.

- Finish implementing the Distutils ``bdist_dpkg`` command.  (AMK)

- Add support for reading shadow passwords [1]_

- It would be nice if the built-in SSL socket type could be used
  for non-blocking SSL I/O.  Currently packages such as Twisted
  which implement async servers using SSL have to require third-party
  packages such as pyopenssl.

- AST-based compiler: this branch was not completed in time for
  2.4, but will land on the trunk some time after 2.4 final is
  out, for inclusion in 2.5.

- reST is going to be used a lot in Zope3.  Maybe it could become
  a standard library module?  (Since reST's author thinks it's too
  instable, I'm inclined not to do this.)


Ongoing tasks
=============

The following are ongoing TO-DO items which we should attempt to
work on without hoping for completion by any particular date.

- Documentation: complete the distribution and installation
  manuals.

- Documentation: complete the documentation for new-style
  classes.

- Look over the ``Demos/`` directory and update where required (Andrew
  Kuchling has done a lot of this)

- New tests.

- Fix doc bugs on SF.

- Remove use of deprecated features in the core.

- Document deprecated features appropriately.

- Mark deprecated C APIs with ``Py_DEPRECATED``.

- Deprecate modules which are unmaintained, or perhaps make a new
  category for modules 'Unmaintained'

- In general, lots of cleanup so it is easier to move forward.


Open issues
===========

None at this time.


Carryover features from Python 2.3
==================================

- The import lock could use some redesign. [2]_

- A nicer API to open text files, replacing the ugly (in some
  people's eyes) "U" mode flag.  There's a proposal out there to
  have a new built-in type ``textfile(filename, mode, encoding)``.
  (Shouldn't it have a *bufsize* argument too?)

- New widgets for Tkinter???

  Has anyone gotten the time for this?  *Are* there any new
  widgets in Tk 8.4?  Note that we've got better Tix support
  already (though not on Windows yet).

- :pep:`304` (Controlling Generation of Bytecode Files by Montanaro)
  seems to have lost steam.

- For a class defined inside another class, the ``__name__`` should be
  "outer.inner", and pickling should work.  ([3]_.  I'm no
  longer certain this is easy or even right.)

- Decide on a clearer deprecation policy (especially for modules)
  and act on it.  For a start, see this message from Neal Norwitz [4]_.
  There seems insufficient interest in moving this further in an
  organized fashion, and it's not particularly important.

- Provide alternatives for common uses of the ``types`` module;
  Skip Montanaro has posted a proto-PEP for this idea [5]_.
  There hasn't been any progress on this, AFAICT.

- Use pending deprecation for the ``types`` and ``string`` modules.  This
  requires providing alternatives for the parts that aren't
  covered yet (e.g. ``string.whitespace`` and ``types.TracebackType``).
  It seems we can't get consensus on this.

- :pep:`262` Database of Installed Python Packages (Kuchling)

  This turns out to be useful for Jack Jansen's Python installer,
  so the database is worth implementing.  Code will go in
  sandbox/pep262.

- :pep:`269` Pgen Module for Python (Riehl)

  (Some necessary changes are in; the ``pgen`` module itself needs to
  mature more.)

- :pep:`266` Optimizing Global Variable/Attribute Access (Montanaro)

  :pep:`267` Optimized Access to Module Namespaces (Hylton)

  :pep:`280` Optimizing access to globals (van Rossum)

  These are basically three friendly competing proposals.  Jeremy
  has made a little progress with a new compiler, but it's going
  slowly and the compiler is only the first step.  Maybe we'll be
  able to refactor the compiler in this release.  I'm tempted to
  say we won't hold our breath.

- Lazily tracking tuples? [6]_ [7]_
  Not much enthusiasm I believe.

- :pep:`286` Enhanced Argument Tuples (von Loewis)

  I haven't had the time to review this thoroughly.  It seems a
  deep optimization hack (also makes better correctness guarantees
  though).

- Make '``as``' a keyword.  It has been a pseudo-keyword long enough.
  Too much effort to bother.


References
==========

.. [1] Shadow Password Support Module
       https://bugs.python.org/issue579435

.. [2] PyErr_Warn may cause import deadlock
       https://bugs.python.org/issue683658

.. [3] Nested class __name__
       https://bugs.python.org/issue633930

.. [4] Neal Norwitz, random vs whrandom
       https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2002-April/023165.html

.. [5] Skip Montanaro, python/dist/src/Lib types.py,1.26,1.27
       https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2002-May/024346.html

.. [6] Daniel Dunbar, Lazily GC tracking tuples
       https://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2002-May/023926.html

.. [7] GC: untrack simple objects
       https://bugs.python.org/issue558745


Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.



..
  Local Variables:
  mode: indented-text
  indent-tabs-mode: nil
  End:
