PEP: 764
Title: Inlined typed dictionaries
Author: Victorien Plot <contact@vctrn.dev>
Sponsor: Eric Traut <erictr at microsoft.com>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/78779
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Typing
Created: 25-Oct-2024
Python-Version: 3.14
Post-History: `29-Jan-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/78779>`__


Abstract
========

:pep:`589` defines a :ref:`class-based <typing:typeddict-class-based-syntax>`
and a :ref:`functional syntax <typing:typeddict-functional-syntax>` to create
typed dictionaries. In both scenarios, it requires defining a class or
assigning to a value. In some situations, this can add unnecessary
boilerplate, especially if the typed dictionary is only used once.

This PEP proposes the addition of a new inlined syntax, by subscripting the
:class:`~typing.TypedDict` type::

    from typing import TypedDict

    def get_movie() -> TypedDict[{'name': str, 'year': int}]:
        return {
            'name': 'Blade Runner',
            'year': 1982,
        }

Motivation
==========

Python dictionaries are an essential data structure of the language. Many
times, it is used to return or accept structured data in functions. However,
it can get tedious to define :class:`~typing.TypedDict` classes:

* A typed dictionary requires a name, which might not be relevant.
* Nested dictionaries require more than one class definition.

Taking a simple function returning some nested structured data as an example::

    from typing import TypedDict

    class ProductionCompany(TypedDict):
        name: str
        location: str

    class Movie(TypedDict):
        name: str
        year: int
        production: ProductionCompany


    def get_movie() -> Movie:
        return {
            'name': 'Blade Runner',
            'year': 1982,
            'production': {
                'name': 'Warner Bros.',
                'location': 'California',
            }
        }


Rationale
=========

The new inlined syntax can be used to resolve these problems::

    def get_movie() -> TypedDict[{'name': str, 'year': int, 'production': TypedDict[{'name': str, 'location': str}]}]:
        ...

While less useful (as the functional or even the class-based syntax can be
used), inlined typed dictionaries can be assigned to a variable, as an alias::

    InlinedTD = TypedDict[{'name': str}]

    def get_movie() -> InlinedTD:
        ...


Specification
=============

The :class:`~typing.TypedDict` special form is made subscriptable, and accepts
a single type argument which must be a :class:`dict`, following the same
semantics as the :ref:`functional syntax <typing:typeddict-functional-syntax>`
(the dictionary keys are strings representing the field names, and values are
valid :ref:`annotation expressions <typing:annotation-expression>`). Only the
comma-separated list of ``key: value`` pairs within braces constructor
(``{k: <type>}``) is allowed, and should be specified directly as the type
argument (i.e. it is not allowed to use a variable which was previously
assigned a :class:`dict` instance).

Inlined typed dictionaries can be referred to as *anonymous*, meaning they
don't have a specific name (see the `runtime behavior <Runtime behavior>`_
section).

It is possible to define a nested inlined dictionary::

    Movie = TypedDict[{'name': str, 'production': TypedDict[{'location': str}]}]

    # Note that the following is invalid as per the updated `type_expression` grammar:
    Movie = TypedDict[{'name': str, 'production': {'location': str}}]

Although it is not possible to specify any class arguments such as ``total``,
any :term:`typing:type qualifier` can be used for individual fields::

    Movie = TypedDict[{'name': NotRequired[str], 'year': ReadOnly[int]}]

Inlined typed dictionaries are implicitly *total*, meaning all keys must be
present. Using the :data:`~typing.Required` type qualifier is thus redundant.

Type variables are allowed in inlined typed dictionaries, provided that they
are bound to some outer scope::

    class C[T]:
        inlined_td: TypedDict[{'name': T}]  # OK, `T` is scoped to the class `C`.

    reveal_type(C[int]().inlined_td['name'])  # Revealed type is 'int'


    def fn[T](arg: T) -> TypedDict[{'name': T}]: ...  # OK: `T` is scoped to the function `fn`.

    reveal_type(fn('a')['name'])  # Revealed type is 'str'


    type InlinedTD[T] = TypedDict[{'name': T}]  # OK, `T` is scoped to the type alias.


    T = TypeVar('T')

    InlinedTD = TypedDict[{'name': T}]  # OK, same as the previous type alias, but using the old-style syntax.


    def func():
        InlinedTD = TypedDict[{'name': T}]  # Not OK: `T` refers to a type variable that is not bound to the scope of `func`.


Typing specification changes
----------------------------

The inlined typed dictionary adds a new kind of
:term:`typing:type expression`. As such, the
:external+typing:token:`~expression-grammar:type_expression` production will
be updated to include the inlined syntax:

.. productionlist:: inlined-typed-dictionaries-grammar
    new-type_expression: `~expression-grammar:type_expression`
                       : | <TypedDict> '[' '{' (string: ':' `~expression-grammar:annotation_expression` ',')* '}' ']'
                       :       (where string is any string literal)

Runtime behavior
----------------

Although :class:`~typing.TypedDict` is commonly referred as a class, it is
implemented as a function at runtime. To be made subscriptable, it will be
changed to be a class.

Creating an inlined typed dictionary results in a new class, so ``T1`` and
``T2`` are of the same type::

    from typing import TypedDict

    T1 = TypedDict('T1', {'a': int})
    T2 = TypedDict[{'a': int}]

As inlined typed dictionaries are are meant to be *anonymous*, their
:attr:`~type.__name__` attribute will be set to an empty string.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

This PEP does not bring any backwards incompatible changes.


Security Implications
=====================

There are no known security consequences arising from this PEP.


How to Teach This
=================

The new inlined syntax will be documented both in the :mod:`typing` module
documentation and the :ref:`typing specification <typing:typed-dictionaries>`.

When complex dictionary structures are used, having everything defined on a
single line can hurt readability. Code formatters can help by formatting the
inlined typed dictionary across multiple lines::

    def edit_movie(
        movie: TypedDict[{
            'name': str,
            'year': int,
            'production': TypedDict[{
                'location': str,
            }],
        }],
    ) -> None:
        ...


Reference Implementation
========================

Mypy supports a similar syntax as an :option:`experimental feature <mypy:mypy.--enable-incomplete-feature>`::

    def test_values() -> {"int": int, "str": str}:
        return {"int": 42, "str": "test"}

Pyright added support for the new syntax in version `1.1.387`_.

.. _1.1.387: https://github.com/microsoft/pyright/releases/tag/1.1.387

Runtime implementation
----------------------

A draft implementation is available `here <https://github.com/Viicos/cpython/commit/49e5a83f>`_.


Rejected Ideas
==============

Using the functional syntax in annotations
------------------------------------------

The alternative functional syntax could be used as an annotation directly::

    def get_movie() -> TypedDict('Movie', {'title': str}): ...

However, call expressions are currently unsupported in such a context for
various reasons (expensive to process, evaluating them is not standardized).

This would also require a name which is sometimes not relevant.

Using ``dict`` or ``typing.Dict`` with a single type argument
-------------------------------------------------------------

We could reuse :class:`dict` or :class:`typing.Dict` with a single type
argument to express the same concept::

    def get_movie() -> dict[{'title': str}]: ...

While this would avoid having to import :class:`~typing.TypedDict` from
:mod:`typing`, this solution has several downsides:

* For type checkers, :class:`dict` is a regular class with two type variables.
  Allowing :class:`dict` to be parametrized with a single type argument would
  require special casing from type checkers, as there is no way to express
  parametrization overloads. On the other hand, :class:`~typing.TypedDict` is
  already a :term:`special form <typing:special form>`.

* If future work extends what inlined typed dictionaries can do, we don't have
  to worry about impact of sharing the symbol with :class:`dict`.

* :class:`typing.Dict` has been deprecated (although not planned for removal)
  by :pep:`585`. Having it used for a new typing feature would be confusing
  for users (and would require changes in code linters).

Using a simple dictionary
-------------------------

Instead of subscripting the :class:`~typing.TypedDict` class, a plain
dictionary could be used as an annotation::

    def get_movie() -> {'title': str}: ...

However, :pep:`584` added union operators on dictionaries and :pep:`604`
introduced :ref:`union types <python:types-union>`. Both features make use of
the :ref:`bitwise or (|) <python:bitwise>` operator, making the following use
cases incompatible, especially for runtime introspection::

    # Dictionaries are merged:
    def fn() -> {'a': int} | {'b': str}: ...

    # Raises a type error at runtime:
    def fn() -> {'a': int} | int: ...

Extending other typed dictionaries
----------------------------------

Several syntaxes could be used to have the ability to extend other typed
dictionaries::

    InlinedBase = TypedDict[{'a': int}]

    Inlined = TypedDict[InlinedBase, {'b': int}]
    # or, by providing a slice:
    Inlined = TypedDict[{'b': int} : (InlinedBase,)]

As inlined typed dictionaries are meant to only support a subset of the
existing syntax, adding this extension mechanism isn't compelling
enough to be supported, considering the added complexity.

If intersections were to be added into the type system, it could cover this
use case.


Open Issues
===========

Should inlined typed dictionaries be proper classes?
----------------------------------------------------

The PEP currently defines inlined typed dictionaries as type objects, to be in
line with the existing syntaxes. To work around the fact that they don't have
a name, their :attr:`~type.__name__` attribute is set to an empty string.

This is somewhat arbitrary, and an alternative name could be used as well
(e.g. ``'<TypedDict>'``).

Alternatively, inlined typed dictionaries could be defined as instances of a
new (internal) typing class, e.g. :class:`!typing._InlinedTypedDict`. While
this solves the naming issue, it requires extra logic in the runtime
implementation to provide the introspection attributes (such as
:attr:`~typing.TypedDict.__total__`), and tools relying on runtime
introspection would have to add proper support for this new type.

Depending on the outcome of the runtime implementation, we can more or less
easily allow extending inlined typed dictionaries::

    InlinedTD = TypedDict[{'a': int}]

    # If `InlinedTD` is a typing._InlinedTypedDict instance, this adds complexity:
    class SubTD(InlinedTD):
        pass

Inlined typed dictionaries and extra items
------------------------------------------

:pep:`728` introduces the concept of :ref:`closed <typed-dict-closed>` type
dictionaries. If this PEP were to be accepted, inlined typed dictionaries
will be *closed* by default. This means :pep:`728` needs to be addressed
first, so that this PEP can be updated accordingly.


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
