PEP: 792
Title: Project status markers in the simple index
Author: William Woodruff <william@yossarian.net>,
        Facundo Tuesca <facundo.tuesca@trailofbits.com>,
Sponsor: Donald Stufft <donald@stufft.io>
PEP-Delegate: Donald Stufft <donald@stufft.io>
Discussions-To: Pending
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Created: 08-Apr-2025
Post-History: `03-Feb-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/79356/>`__,

Abstract
========

This PEP proposes a standardized set of project status markers, as well
as a mechanism for communicating those markers in the HTML and JSON
simple indices.

Rationale and Motivation
========================

The "status" of a project is an important piece of metadata, made more important
by growth in both the size and complexity of the Python packaging ecosystem.
Project status (or proxies such as recent activity) is useful to know in
determining whether a project is maintained or otherwise suitable for consumption.

Python packaging has at least three different mechanisms for communicating
the "status" of a project:

1. Distribution packages can include *trove classifiers* in their metadata, as
   originally specified in :pep:`301`. The list of supported classifiers is
   `maintained by the PyPA <https://github.com/pypa/trove-classifiers>`_,
   and includes the ``Development Status`` hierarchy. For example, a
   distribution can include the ``Development Status :: 7 - Inactive``
   classifier to indicate that the distribution's project is inactive.

   Trove classifiers are flexible, but also come with significant limitations:
   they're machine-readable and are rendered on indices like PyPI, but
   they also require the maintainer to push one or more *new* distributions
   each time they wish to update their project's development status.
   Furthermore, because distributions are *de facto* immutable in the Python
   packaging ecosystem, older distributions can't have their classifiers
   updated to reflect the current status of the project.

2. Indices can mark distributions and releases as "yanked", as originally
   specified in :pep:`592`. Yanked distributions are not considered
   eligible for dependency resolution.

   When a distribution has been yanked, it is marked with ``data-yanked``
   in the HTML index and with ``yanked: bool | str`` in the JSON index.
   Additionally, indices like PyPI will hide yanked distributions by default
   and will render them with a notice when the user navigates directly to them.

   Yanking is machine-readable like trove classifiers, but is single-purpose
   rather than general-purpose: users can specify a free-text reason for
   yanking a given distribution package, but the semantics of yanking are
   fixed, and no reliable inference of project status can be made by a machine
   based upon that free-text reason.

3. PyPI itself has *project statuses*, which apply to the entire project
   (i.e., all releases and distributions). Project statuses have both
   maintainer- and index-admin-controllable states:

   * PyPI administrators can "quarantine" a project. Quarantine behaves like
     a strengthened yank: the project remains entirely uninstallable while
     quarantined.

   * Project owners can "archive" a project. Archiving a project
     disables new release and distribution uploads to that project,
     but otherwise has no effect on the ability to download a project.

   Project statuses are machine-readable *in principle*, but are not currently
   exposed via any of PyPI's APIs. Instead, PyPI renders project statuses on
   each project's user-facing (i.e. non-index) webpage.

In summary, there are multiple ways to communicate the "status" of a project in
Python packaging. However, none of them satisfy the four characteristics we desire.
There is no current project status indicator that is machine-readable, general,
index-agnostic, and applies to the entire project, instead of per-release or
per-distribution.

===================== ================ ======= ============== ============
Mechanism             Machine-readable General Index-agnostic Project-wide
===================== ================ ======= ============== ============
Trove classifiers     ✅               ✅       ✅             ❌
Yanking               ✅               ❌       ✅             ✅
PyPI project statuses ✅               ✅       ❌             ✅
===================== ================ ======= ============== ============

This PEP proposes adopting PyPI's project statuses as an index-agnostic
mechanism, satisfying all four conditions.

Specification
=============

This PEP specifies two aspects: a set of project status markers,
as well as their presentation in the standard HTML and JSON indices.

Project status markers
----------------------

This PEP proposes the following project status markers.

A project always has exactly one status. If no status is explicitly noted,
then the project is considered to be in the ``active`` state.

Indices **MAY** implement any subset of the status markers specified in this
PEP, as applicable.

``active``
~~~~~~~~~~

Description: The project is active. This is the default status for a project.

Index semantics:

* The index hosting the project **MUST** allow uploads of new distributions to
  the project.
* The index **MUST** offer existing distributions of the project for download.

Installer semantics: none.

``archived``
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Description: The project does not expect to be updated in the future.

Index semantics:

* The index hosting the project **MUST NOT** allow uploads of new distributions to
  the project.
* The index **MUST** offer existing distributions of the project for download.

Installer semantics:

* Installers **MAY** produce warnings about a project's archival.

``quarantined``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Description: The project is considered generally unsafe for use, e.g. due to
malware.

Index semantics:

* The index hosting the project **MUST NOT** allow uploads of new distributions to
  the project.
* The index **MUST NOT** offer any distributions of the project for download.

Installer semantics:

* Installers **MAY** produce warnings about a project's quarantine, although
  doing so is effectively moot (as the index will not offer any distributions
  for installation).

``deprecated``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Description: The project is considered obsolete, and may have been superseded
by another project.

Index semantics:

* This status shares the same semantics as ``active``.

Installer semantics:

* Installers **MAY** produce warnings about a project's deprecation.

Status markers in the index APIs
--------------------------------

This PEP defines version 1.4 of the index APIs.

HTML index
~~~~~~~~~~

The following changes are made to the
:ref:`simple repository API <packaging:simple-repository-api-base>`:

* The index **SHALL** define the ``pypi:repository-version`` as ``1.4``.
* The index **SHOULD** add an appropriate ``pypi:project-status`` meta tag, with
  a ``content`` of the project's status marker. The index **MAY** choose to omit
  the ``pypi:project-status`` meta tag if the project is marked as ``active``.

For example, the following would be a valid HTML index response for
``sampleproject`` after is has been marked as ``quarantined``:

.. code-block:: html
   :emphasize-lines: 5

    <!DOCTYPE html>
    <html>
      <head>
        <meta name="pypi:repository-version" content="1.4">
        <meta name="pypi:project-status" content="quarantined">
        <title>Links for sampleproject</title>
      </head>
      <body>
        <h1>Links for sampleproject</h1>
      </body>
    </html>

Observe that, per the ``quarantined`` semantics above, the index response
contains no distribution links for the project.

JSON index
~~~~~~~~~~

The following changes are made to the
:ref:`JSON simple index <packaging:simple-repository-api-json>`:

* The index **SHALL** define the ``meta.api-version`` as ``1.4``.
* The index **SHOULD** include a ``project-status`` key in the JSON response,
  with a value of the project's status marker. The index **MAY** choose to omit
  the ``project-status`` key if the project is marked as ``active``.

For example, the following would be a valid JSON index response for
``sampleproject`` after is has been marked as ``quarantined``:

.. code-block:: json
   :emphasize-lines: 5

    {
      "meta": {
        "api-version": "1.4"
      },
      "project-status": "quarantined",
      "alternate-locations": [],
      "files": [],
      "name": "sampleproject",
      "versions": [
        "1.2.0",
        "1.3.0",
        "1.3.1",
        "2.0.0",
        "3.0.0",
        "4.0.0"
      ]
    }

Observe that, like with the HTML index, the JSON response contains no
distribution links for the ``quarantined`` project.

Future Considerations
=====================

This PEP defines only four project status markers: ``active``, ``archived``,
``quarantined``, and ``deprecated``.

Future PEPs (or PyPA standards processes) may define additional project
status markers, as needed.

As specified in this PEP, project status markers are "bare," i.e. they
convey no additional user-controlled metadata (such as an explanation
for a project's archival).

A future PEP may choose to extend the project
status mechanism to include user-controlled metadata, in a manner similar
to the free-form text allowed during release yanking.

Security Implications
=====================

This PEP does not identify any positive or negative security implications
associated with adding project status markers.

How to Teach This
=================

Educating the Python community about this PEP has two aspects:

* Ordinary package maintainers will need to be informed of their ability to
  set project status markers, e.g. to inform their downstreams that
  a project has been archived or deprecated.

  If this PEP is accepted, the authors of this PEP will coordinate with
  PyPI on appropriate maintainer-oriented documentation and communication,
  including feature announcement blog posts and updates to
  `PyPI's user documentation <https://docs.pypi.org>`_.

* Installer and index maintainers will need to be informed of the new project
  status markers, and how to interpret them.

  If this PEP is accepted, the authors of this PEP will perform its
  implementation on PyPI, serving as a reference implementation for other
  indices.

  This PEP does not *mandate* any changes in installer behavior. However,
  if this PEP is accepted, the authors of this PEP will coordinate with
  the maintainers of popular installers (e.g. ``pip``) to help each determine
  the extent to which they wish to surface project statuses.

Rejected Ideas
==============

Using "reserved" keys
---------------------

One alternative to this PEP is to avoid standardizing project status
markers directly, but instead leverage existing mechanisms within the standards
to communicate them in a non-standard fashion.

For example, the `JSON simple index <packaging:simple-repository-api-json>`_
says the following:

    Keys (at any level) with a leading underscore are reserved as private for
    index server use. No future standard will assign a meaning to any such key.

In effect, this means that the following would be standards-compliant:

.. code-block:: json
    :emphasize-lines: 5

    {
      "meta": {
        "api-version": "1.4"
      },
      "_project-status": "quarantined",
      "alternate-locations": [],
      "files": [],
      "name": "sampleproject",
      "versions": [
        "1.2.0",
        "1.3.0",
        "1.3.1",
        "2.0.0",
        "3.0.0",
        "4.0.0"
      ]
    }

However, this approach has several drawbacks:

* Standards-aligned tools (such as ``pip``, ``pip-audit``, and ``uv``)
  may find it unacceptable to use a "reserved" key, since that key will
  have no standard semantics or compatibility properties.
* The "reserved" approach is only suitable for the JSON simple index;
  no equivalent mechanism exists for the HTML simple index.
  This would disadvantage consumers of the HTML simple index, as well as
  mirror implementations that may consume the JSON index but only expose
  an HTML index.

Project markers in PyPI's non-standard JSON API
-----------------------------------------------

Another standardization-avoidance alternative is to expose project status
markers, but only in PyPI's
`non-standard JSON API <https://docs.pypi.org/api/json/>`_. PyPI has full
control over the layout of this API, and could include a ``project-status``
or similar key without needing a PEP or underscore prefix.

This has similar drawbacks as the "reserved" keys approach above,
and more generally deepens the differences between the standard
and non-standard APIs.

Multiple project status markers at once
---------------------------------------

An earlier version of this PEP considered proposing support for
multiple project markers at once. For example, a project could be marked
as both ``archived`` and ``quarantined``.

After consideration, this was rejected for complexity reasons: having multiple
project status markers requires the PEP to specify a conflict resolution
mechanism when merging their semantics, as well as as state machine for which
markers are exclusive (for example, ``active`` is conceptually exclusive with
all other markers, while ``archived`` and ``quarantined`` are conceptually
compatible with each other).

Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the CC0-1.0-Universal
license, whichever is more permissive.
