PEP: 818
Title: Upstreaming the Pyodide JavaScript Foreign Function Interface
Author: Hood Chatham <roberthoodchatham at gmail.com>
Sponsor: Łukasz Langa <lukasz at python.org>
Discussions-To:
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Created: 10-Dec-2025
Python-Version: 3.15
Post-History:

Abstract
========

Pyodide is a distribution of Python for JavaScript runtimes, including browsers.
Browsers are a universal computing platform. As with C for Unix family operating
systems, in the browser platform all fundamental capabilities are exposed
through the JavaScript language. For years, Pyodide has included a comprehensive
JavaScript foreign function interface. This provides the equivalent of the
``os`` module for the JavaScript world.

This PEP proposes adding the core of the Pyodide foreign function interface to
Python.

Motivation
==========

The Pyodide project is a Python distribution for JavaScript runtimes. Pyodide is
a very popular project. In 2025 to date, Pyodide has received over a billion
requests on JsDelivr. The popularity is rapidly growing: usage has more than
doubled in each of the last two years.

Pyodide includes several components:

1. A port of CPython to the Emscripten compiler toolchain (a toolchain to
   compile linux C/C++ programs to JavaScript and WebAssembly).
2. A foreign function interface for calling Python from JavaScript and
   JavaScript from Python.
3. A JavaScript programmatic interface for managing the Python runtime and
   package installation.
4. An ABI for native extensions.
5. A toolchain to cross-compile Python packages compatible with that ABI for use
   with Pyodide.

In the long run, we would like to upstream the runtime components (1)--(4) of
the Pyodide project into CPython. In 2022, Christian Heimes upstreamed (1) the
Emscripten port of CPython, and Emscripten is currently a tier 3 supported
platform  (see :pep:`776`). :pep:`783` proposes to allow Pyodide-compatible
wheels to be uploaded to PyPI. What is needed for these to be
Emscripten-CPython-compatible wheels is to upstream (2) the Python/JavaScript
foreign function interface and (4) the ABI for native extensions. This PEP
concerns partially upstreaming (2) the Python/JavaScript foreign function
interface.

This interface is similar to the ``os`` module for Python on linux: all IO
requires going through libc and the ``os`` module provides access to libc calls
to Python code. Similarly, in a JavaScript runtime, to do any actual work
requires making calls into JavaScript: for example, it is required to display
content to the screen, to receive user input, to handle events, to access
databases, etc. For instance, once Python has a JavaScript foreign function
interface, it will be possible to support ``urllib`` on Emscripten. Downstream,
supporting ``urllib3``, ``aiohttp``, and ``httpx`` requires the foreign function
interface.

In order to keep the length of this PEP reasonable, we focus on the "core" of
the foreign function interface. Three areas are left to future PEPs:

1. asyncio
2. integration between the buffer protocol and JavaScript equivalents
3. a JavaScript interface for managing the Python runtime


Rationale
=========

Our goal here is to upstream Pyodide's foreign function interface, without
breaking backwards compatibility more than necessary for Pyodide's large
collection of existing users. On the other hand, the best time to making
breaking changes is now.

With that in mind, we wish here to justify not that our design is perfect but
that the costs of any changes outweigh the benefits.

Translating Objects
-------------------

The most fundamental decision is how we translate objects from one language to
the other. When translating an object, we can either choose to convert the value
into a similar object in the target language, or to make a proxy that "wraps"
the original object. A few considerations apply here:

1. Mutability: If we call a function that expects to mutate its argument, then
   it is important that we proxy the argument and not convert it. Otherwise, the
   function mutates a copy that we then throw away. So implicit conversion is
   only a reasonable option for immutable objects.
2. Round trip behavior: It is strongly desirable that passing an object from
   Python to JavaScript back to Python results in the original Python object and
   vice-versa. If the object is immutable, it is okay if the result is only
   equal to the original object and not the same object. If the object is
   mutable, it should be the same object.
3. Performance characteristics: Converting a complex object entails a lot of up
   front work. If the object is only minimally used, then it may be less
   performant. On the other hand, each access to an object via a proxy is slower
   than to a native object so if the object is used a lot, converting up front
   is more efficient than proxying. Proxying by default and allowing the user to
   explicitly convert when they want to gives the user maximum control over
   performance.
4. Ergonomics: A native object is in many cases easier to work with.

JavaScript has the following immutable types: ``string``, ``undefined``,
``boolean``, ``number`` and ``bigint``. It also has the special value ``null``.

Of these, ``string`` and ``boolean`` directly correspond to ``str`` and
``bool``. ``number`` and ``bigint`` awkwardly correspond to ``float`` and
``int``. ``undefined`` is the default value for a missing argument so it
corresponds to ``None``. We invent a new falsey singleton Python value
``jsnull`` to act as the conversion of ``null``. We also make a new type
``JsBigInt`` to act as the conversion for ``bigint``. All other types are
proxied.

In particular, even though ``tuples`` are immutable, they have no equivalent in
JavaScript so we proxy them. They can be manually converted to an ``Array`` with
the ``toJs()`` method if desired.

Proxies
-------

A ``JsProxy`` is a Python object used for accessing a JavaScript object. While
the ``JsProxy`` exists, the underlying JavaScript object is kept in a table
which keeps it from being garbage collected.

A ``PyProxy`` is a JavaScript object used for accessing a Python object. When a
``PyProxy`` is created, the reference count of the underlying Python object is
incremented. When the ``.destroy()`` method is called, the reference count of the
underlying Python object is decremented and the proxy is disabled. Any further
attempt to use it raises an error.

The base ``JsProxy`` implements property access, equality checks, ``__repr__``,
``__eq__``, ``__bool__``, and a handful of other convenience methods. We also
define a large number of mixins by mapping abstract Python object protocols to
abstract JavaScript object protocols (and vice-versa). The mapping described in
this PEP is as follows:

Base proxies (properties common to all objects):

* ``__getattribute__`` <==> ``Reflect.get`` (proxy handler)
* ``__setattr__`` <==> ``Reflect.set`` (proxy handler)
* ``__eq__`` <==> ``===`` (object identity)
* ``__repr__`` <==> ``toString``

For the ``__str__`` implementation, we inherit the default implementation which
uses ``__repr__``.

We implement the following mappings between protocols as mixins. When we create
a proxy, we feature detect which of these abstract and concrete protocols it
supports and create a class for the proxy with the appropriate mixins.

* ``__iter__`` <==> ``[Symbol.iterator]``
* ``__next__`` <==> ``next``
* ``__len__`` <==> ``length``, ``size``
* ``__getitem__`` <==> ``get``
* ``__setitem__``, ``__delitem__`` <==> ``set``, ``delete``
* ``__contains__`` <==> ``includes``, ``has``
* ``__call__`` <==> ``Reflect.apply`` (proxy handler)
* ``Generator`` <==> ``Generator``
* ``Exception`` <==> ``Error``
* ``MutableSequence`` <==> ``Array``

If a JavaScript object has a ``[Symbol.dispose]()`` method, we make the Python
object into a context manager, but we do not presently use context managers to
implement ``[Symbol.dispose]()``.

JavaScript also has ``Reflect.construct`` (the ``new`` keyword). Callable
JsProxies have a method called ``new()`` which corresponds to
``Reflect.construct``.

The following additional mappings are defined in Pyodide. It is our intention to
eventually add them to Python itself, but they are deferred to a future PEP:

* ``__await__`` <==> ``then``
* ``__aiter__`` <==> ``[Symbol.asyncIterator]``
* ``__anext__`` <==> ``next`` (same as ``__next__``; check for presence of
  ``[Symbol.asyncIterator]`` to distinguish)
* ``AsyncGenerator`` <==> ``AsyncGenerator``
* buffer protocol <==> typed arrays
* Async context managers are implemented on JsProxies that implement
  ``[Symbol.asyncDispose]``.

Garbage Collection and Destruction of Proxies
---------------------------------------------

The most fundamental difficulty that we face is the existence of two garbage
collectors, the Python garbage collector and the JavaScript garbage collector.
Any reference loop from Python to JavaScript back to Python will be leaked.
Furthermore, even if there is no loop, the JavaScript garbage collector has no
idea how much memory a ``PyProxy`` owns nor how much memory pressure the Python
garbage collector faces.

For this reason, we need to include a way to manually break references between
languages. In Python, destructors are run eagerly when the reference count of an
object reaches 0. Thus, if a programmer wishes to manually release a JavaScript
object, they can delete all references to it and after that the JavaScript
garbage collector will be able to reclaim it.

On the other hand, JavaScript finalizers are not reliable. The proposal that
introduced them to the language says the following:

    If an application or library depends on GC [calling a finalizer] in a timely,
    predictable manner, it's likely to be disappointed: the cleanup may happen much
    later than expected, or not at all.

    ...

    It's best if [finalizers] are used as a way to avoid excess memory usage, or as a
    backstop against certain bugs, rather than as a normal way to clean up external
    resources.

https://github.com/tc39/proposal-weakrefs?tab=readme-ov-file#a-note-of-caution

A ``PyProxy`` has a ``destroy()`` method that manually detaches the ``PyProxy``
and releases the Python reference. We consider destroying a ``PyProxy`` to be
the correct, normal way to clean it up. As recommended by the proposal, the
finalizer is treated as a backstop. In the Pyodide test suite, we require that
every ``PyProxy`` be manually destroyed in the majority of the tests. This helps
to ensure that our APIs are designed in a way that keeps this ergonomic.

Calling Conventions
-------------------

Calling a Python Function from JavaScript
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To call a callable ``PyProxy`` we do the following steps:

1. Translate each argument from JavaScript to Python and place the arguments
   in a C array.
2. Use ``PyObject_VectorCall`` to call the Python object.
3. If a JavaScript error is raised, this is fatal -- Python interpreter
   invariants have been violated. Report the fatal error and tear down the Python interpreter.
4. If the Python error flag is set, set ``sys.last_value`` to the current
   exception. Convert the Python exception to a JavaScript ``PythonError``
   object. This ``PythonError`` object records the type, the formatted traceback
   of the Python exception, and a weak reference to the original Python
   exception. Throw this ``PythonError``.
5. Translate the result from Python to JavaScript and return it.

Note here that if a ``JsProxy`` is created but the Python function does not
store a reference to it, it will be released immediately. The JavaScript error
doesn't hold a strong reference the Python exception because JavaScript errors
are often leaked and Python error objects hold a reference to frame objects
which may hold a significant amount of memory.

Calling a JavaScript Function from Python
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To call a callable ``JsProxy`` we do the following steps:

1. Make an empty array called ``pyproxies``
2. Translate each positional argument from Python to JavaScript and place these
   arguments in a JavaScript array called ``jsargs``. If any ``PyProxy`` is
   generated in this way, don't register a JavaScript finalizer for it and do
   append it to ``pyproxies``.
3. If there are any keyword arguments, create an empty JavaScript object
   ``jskwargs``, translate each keyword argument to JavaScript and assign
   ``jskwargs[key] = jskwarg``. Append ``jskwargs`` to ``jsargs``. If any
   ``PyProxy`` is generated in this way, don't register a JavaScript finalizer
   for it and do append it to ``pyproxies``.
4. Call the JavaScript function and store the result into ``jsresult``.
5. If an error is thrown:

    a. If the error is a ``PythonError`` and the weak reference to the Python
       exception is still alive, raise the referenced Python exception.
    b. Otherwise, convert the exception from JavaScript to Python and raise the
       result. Note that the ``JsException`` object holds a reference to the
       original JavaScript error.

6. If ``jsresult`` is a JavaScript generator, iterate over ``pyproxies`` and
   register a JavaScript finalizer for each. Wrap the generator with a new
   generator that destroys ``pyproxies`` when they are exhausted. Translate the
   wrapped generator to Python and return it.
7. Otherwise, translate ``jsresult`` to Python and store it in ``pyresult``.
8. Iterate over ``pyproxies`` and destroy them. If ``jsresult`` is a
   ``PyProxy``, destroy it too.
9.  Return ``pyresult``.

This is modeled on the calling convention for C Python APIs.

Defense of the Calling Convention for a ``JsProxy``
---------------------------------------------------

The calling convention from JavaScript into Python is uncontroversial so we will
not defend it. The calling convention from Python into JavaScript is more
controversial so we will explain here why we believe it is a better design than
the alternatives.

The main disadvantage of this design is that it is not as ergonomic in cases
where the callee is going to persist its arguments. However, we argue that the
benefits outweigh this.

The biggest advantage of this approach is that it makes it possible to use
JavaScript functions that are unaware of the existence of Python without memory
leaks. Another advantage is that registering a finalizer for a ``PyProxy`` is
somewhat expensive and so avoiding this step can substantially decrease the
overhead for certain Python to JavaScript calls.

An Example of a Disadvantage of the Calling Convention
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We will start by illustrating the common complaint about the Python to
JavaScript calling convention. Consider the following example:


.. code-block:: python

    from pyodide.code import run_js
    set_x = run_js("(x) => { globalThis.x = x; }")
    get_x = run_js("(x) => globalThis.x")

    set_x({})
    get_x()

This code is broken. Calling ``set_x`` creates a PyProxy but it is destroyed
when the call is done. When we call ``get_x()`` the following error is raised::

    This borrowed proxy was automatically destroyed at the end of a function call.

To fix it to manage memory correctly, we can change ``set_x`` to the following
function:

.. code-block:: javascript

    (x) => {
        globalThis.x?.destroy?.();
        globalThis.x = x?.copy?.() ?? x;
    }

Or we can manage the memory from Python using ``create_proxy()`` as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    from pyodide.ffi import JsDoubleProxy
    from pyodide.code import run_js

    setXJs = run_js("(x) => { globalThis.x = x; }")
    def set_x(x):
        orig_x = get_x()
        if isinstance(orig_x, JsDoubleProxy):
            orig_x.destroy()
        xpx = create_proxy(x)
        setXJs(xpx)

This extra boilerplate is not too hard to get right -- it's roughly equivalent
to what is needed to assign an attribute in C. However, it does impose a
nontrivial complexity cost on the user and so we need to justify why this is
better than the alternatives.

A Use Case That Is Made Simpler By This Calling Convention
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Suppose we have a Python function ``render()`` that returns a buffer, and a
JavaScript function ``drawImageToCanvas(buffer)`` that displays the buffer on a
canvas. If the buffer is a 1024 by 1024 bitmap with four color channels, then it
is a 4 megabyte buffer. Imagine the following code:

.. code-block:: python

    @create_proxy
    def main_loop():
        update()
        buf = render()
        drawImageToCanvas(buffer)
        requestAnimationFrame(main_loop)

With the calling convention described here, the buffer is released normally
after each call and memory usage stays consistent, in my tests it stays at 57
megabytes.

If we rely on a JavaScript finalizer to release ``buffer``, in my tests the
JavaScript finalizer doesn't run until malloc runs out of space on the
WebAssembly heap and requests more memory, with the effect that over several
minutes the WebAssembly heap gradually grows to the maximum allowed 4 gigabytes
and then a memory error is raised.

Now a cooperating implementation of ``drawImageToCanvas()`` could destroy the
``buffer`` when it is done, but my philosophy in designing the calling
convention was that it should be possible to take care of the memory management
from Python. This necessitates something like the current approach.

Specification
=============

The Pseudocode in this Document
-------------------------------

The pseudocode in this PEP is generally written in Python or JavaScript. We
leave out most resource management and exception handling except when we think
it is particularly interesting. If an error is raised, we implicitly clean up
all resources and propagate the error. A large fraction of the real code
consists of resource management and exception handling.

For the most part the code works as written but in a few spots we directly call
a C API from Python or otherwise write code that wouldn't run but whose intent
we believe is clear.

In Python code when we want to execute a JavaScript function inline, we write it
like:

.. code-block:: python

    jsfunc = run_js("(x, y) => doSomething")
    jsfunc(x, y)

Conversely, when we want to execute Python code inline in JavaScript we write it
like this:

.. code-block:: javascript

    const pyfunc = makePythonFunction(`
        def pyfunc(x, y):
            # do something
    `);
    pyfunc(x, y)

For the most part, this code could actually be used if performance was not a
concern. In some places there may be bootstrapping issues.

Our first task is to define the Python callable ``run_js`` and the JavaScript
callable ``makePythonFunction``. ``run_js`` is a ``JsProxy`` and
``makePythonFunction`` is a ``PyProxy``.

To make sense of this, we need to describe

1. how we convert values from JavaScript to Python and from Python to JavaScript
2. how to call a Python function from JavaScript and how to call a JavaScript
   function from Python

We can directly represent a ``PyObject*`` as a ``number`` in JavaScript so we
can describe the process of calling a ``PyObject*`` from JavaScript. On the
other hand, JavaScript objects are not directly representable in Python, we have
to create a ``JsProxy`` of it. We describe first the process of calling a
``JsProxy``, the process of creating it is described in the section on
JsProxies.

Converting Values between Python and JavaScript
-----------------------------------------------

A few primitive types are implicitly converted between Python and JavaScript.
Implicit conversions are supposed to round trip, so that when converting from
Python to JavaScript back to Python or from JavaScript to Python back to
JavaScript, the result is the same primitive as we started with. The one
exception to this is that a JavaScript ``BigInt`` that is smaller than ``2^53``
round trips to a ``Number``. We convert ``undefined`` to ``None`` and introduce
the special falsey singleton ``pyodide.ffi.jsnull`` to convert ``null``. We also
introduce a subtype of ``int`` called ``pyodide.ffi.JsBigInt`` which converts to
and from JavaScript ``bigint``.

Implicit conversions are done with the C functions ``_Py_python2js`` and
``_Py_js2python()``. These functions cannot be called directly from Python code
because the ``JsVal`` type is not representable in Python.

Implicit conversion from Python to JavaScript
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``JsVal _Py_python2js_track_proxies(PyObject* pyvalue, JsVal pyproxies, bool gc_register)``
is responsible for implicit conversions from Python to JavaScript. It does the
following steps:

1. if ``pyvalue`` is ``None``, return ``undefined``
2. if ``pyvalue`` is ``jsnull``, return ``null``
3. if ``pyvalue`` is ``True``, return ``true``
4. if ``pyvalue`` is ``False``, return ``false``
5. if ``pyvalue`` is a ``str``, convert the string to JavaScript and return the result.
6. if ``pyvalue`` is an instance of ``JsBigInt``, convert it to a ``BigInt``.
7. if ``pyvalue`` is an ``int`` and it is less than ``2^53``, convert it to
   a ``Number``. Otherwise, convert it to a ``BigInt``
8. if ``pyvalue`` is a ``float``, convert it to  a ``Number``.
9. if ``pyvalue`` is a ``JsProxy``, convert it to the wrapped JavaScript value.
10. Let ``result`` be ``createPyProxy(pyvalue, {gcRegister: gc_register})``. If
    ``pyproxies`` is an array, append ``result`` to ``pyproxies``.

We define ``JsVal _Py_python2js(PyObject* pyvalue)`` to be
``_Py_python2js_track_proxies(pyvalue, Js_undefined, true)``.

Implicit conversion from JavaScript to Python
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``PyObject* _Py_js2python(JsVal jsvalue)`` is responsible for implicit
conversions from JavaScript to Python.

We first define the helper function ``PyObject* _Py_js2python_immutable(JsVal jsvalue)``
does the following steps:

1. if ``jsvalue`` is ``undefined``, return ``None``
2. if ``jsvalue`` is ``null`` return ``jsnull``
3. if ``jsvalue`` is ``true`` return ``True``
4. if ``jsvalue`` is ``false`` return ``False``
5. if ``jsvalue`` is a ``string``, convert the string to Python and return the
   result.
6. if ``jsvalue`` is a ``Number`` and ``Number.isSafeInteger(jsvalue)`` returns
   ``true``, then convert ``jsvalue`` to an ``int``. Otherwise convert it to a
   ``float``.
7. if ``jsvalue`` is a ``BigInt`` then convert it to an ``JsBigInt``.
8. If ``jsvalue`` is a ``PyProxy`` that has not been destroyed, convert it to
   the wrapped Python value.
9. If the ``jsvalue`` is a ``PyProxy`` that has been destroyed, throw an error
   indicating this.
10. Return ``NoValue``.


``_Py_js2python(JsVal jsvalue)`` does the following steps:

1. Let ``result`` be ``_Py_js2python_immutable(jsvalue)``. If ``result`` is
   not ``NoValue``, return ``result``.
2. Return ``create_jsproxy(jsvalue)``.

Error handling
--------------

At the boundary between JavaScript and C, we have to translate errors.

Executing JavaScript Code from C
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When we execute any JavaScript code from C, we wrap it in a try/catch block. If
an error is caught, we use ``_Py_js2python(jserror)`` to convert it into a
Python exception, set the Python error flag to this python exception, and return
the appropriate error value to signal an error. This makes it ergonomic to
create JavaScript functions that can be called from C and follow CPython's
normal conventions for C APIs.

Executing C Code from JavaScript
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Whenever we call into C from JavaScript, we wrap the call in the following
boilerplate:

.. code-block:: javascript

    try {
        result = some_c_function();
    } catch (e) {
        // If an error was thrown here, the C runtime state is corrupted.
        // Signal a fatal error and tear down the interpreter.
        fatal_error(e);
    }
    // Depending on the API, we check for -1, 0, _PyErr_Occurred(), etc to
    // decide if an error occurred.
    if (result === -1) {
        // This function takes the error flag and converts it to a JavaScript
        // exception. It leaves the error flag cleared.
        throw __Py_pythonexc2js();
    }


Calling Conventions
-------------------

Calling a Python Function from JavaScript
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To call a ``PyObject*`` from JavaScript we use the following code:

.. code-block:: javascript

    function callPyObjectKwargs(pyfuncptr, jsargs, kwargs) {
        const num_pos_args = jsargs.length;
        const kwargs_names = Object.keys(kwargs);
        const kwargs_values = Object.values(kwargs);
        const num_kwargs = kwargs_names.length;
        jsargs.push(...kwargs_values);
        // apply the usual error handling logic for calling from JavaScript into C.
        return _PyProxy_apply(pyfuncptr, jsargs, num_pos_args, kwargs_names, num_kwargs);
    }

**_PyProxy_apply(PyObject* callable, JsVal jsargs, Py_ssize_t num_pos_args, JsVal kwargs_names, Py_ssize_t num_kwargs)**

1. Let ``total_args`` be ``num_pos_args + numkwargs``.
2. Create a C array ``pyargs`` of length ``total_args``.
3. For ``i`` ranging from ``0`` to ``total_args - 1``:

    a. Execute the JavaScript code ``jsargs[i]`` and store the result into
       ``jsitem``.
    b. Set ``pyargs[i]`` to ``_Py_js2python(jsitem)``.

4. Let ``pykwnames`` be a new tuple of length ``numkwargs``
5. For ``i`` ranging from ``0`` to ``numkwargs - 1``:

    a. Execute the JavaScript code ``jskwnames[i]`` and store the result into
       ``jskey``.
    b. Set the ith entry of ``pykwnames`` to ``_Py_js2python(jsitem)``.

6. Let ``pyresult`` be ``_PyObject_Vectorcall(callable, pyargs, num_pos_args, pykwnames)``.
7. Return ``_Py_python2js(pyresult)``.

Calling a JavaScript Function from Python
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**``JsMethod_ConvertArgs(posargs, kwargs, pyproxies)``**

First we define the function ``JsMethod_ConvertArgs`` to convert the Python
arguments to a JavaScript array of arguments. Any ``PyProxy`` created at this
stage is not tracked by the finalization registry and is added to the JavaScript
list ``pyproxies`` so we can either destroy it or track it later. This function
performs the following steps:

1. Let ``jsargs`` be a new empty JavaScript list.
2. For each positional argument:

    a. Set ``JsVal jsarg = _Py_python2js_track_proxies(pyarg, proxies, /*gc_register:*/false);``.
    b. Call ``_PyJsvArray_Push(jsargs, arg);``.

3. If there are any keyword arguments:

    a. Let ``jskwargs`` be a new empty JavaScript object.
    b. For each keyword argument pykey, pyvalue:

        i.   Set ``JsVal jskey = _Py_python2js(pykey)``
        ii.  Set ``JsVal jsvalue = _Py_python2js_track_proxies(pyvalue, proxies, /*gc_register:*/false)``
        iii. Set the ``jskey`` property on ``jskwargs`` to ``jsvalue``.

    c. Call ``_PyJsvArray_Push(jsargs, jskwargs);``

4. Return ``jsargs``

**``JsMethod_Vectorcall(jsproxy, posargs, kwargs)``**

Each ``JsProxy`` of a function has an underlying JavaScript function and an
underlying ``this`` value.

1.  Let ``jsfunc`` be the JavaScript function associated to ``jsproxy``.
2.  Let ``jsthis`` be the ``this`` value associated to ``jsproxy``.
3.  Let ``pyproxies`` be a new empty JavaScript list.
4.  Execute ``JsMethod_ConvertArgs(posargs, kwargs, pyproxies)`` and store the
    result into ``jsargs``.
5.  Execute the JavaScript code ``Function.prototype.apply.apply(jsfunc, [ jsthis, jsargs ])``
    and store the result into ``jsresult``.
    (Apply the usual error handling for calling from C into JavaScript.)
6.  If ``jsresult`` is a ``PyProxy`` run the JavaScript code ``pyproxies.push(jsresult)``
7.  Set ``destroy_args`` to ``true``
8.  If ``jsresult`` is a ``Generator`` set ``destroy_args`` to ``false`` and set
    ``jsresult`` to ``wrap_generator(jsresult, pyproxies)``.
9. Execute ``_Py_js2python(jsresult)`` and store the result into ``pyresult``.
10. If ``destroy_args`` is ``true``, then destroy all the proxies in ``pyproxies``.
11. If ``destroy_args`` is ``false``, gc register all the proxies in ``pyproxies``.
12. Return ``pyresult``.

``wrap_generator(jsresult, pyproxies)`` is a JavaScript function that wraps a
JavaScript generator in a new generator that destroys all the proxies in
``pyproxies`` when the generator is exhausted.

``run_js``
----------

The Python object ``pyodide.code.run_js`` is defined as follows:

1. Execute the JavaScript code ``eval`` and store the result into ``jseval``.
2. Run ``_Py_js2python(jseval)`` and store the result into ``run_js``.

``makePythonFunction``
----------------------

Unlike ``run_js``, the JavaScript object ``makePythonFunction`` is strictly for
the sake of our pseudocode and will not be included as part of the API. We
define define ``makePythonFunction`` as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    def make_python_function(code):
        mod = ast.parse(code)
        if isinstance(mod.body[0], ast.FunctionDef):
            d = {}
            exec(code, d)
            return d[mod.body[0].name]
        return eval(code)

1. Let ``make_python_function`` be the function above.
2. Run ``_Py_python2js(make_python_function)`` and store the result into
   ``makePythonFunction``.


JsProxy
-------

We define 14 different abstract protocols that a JavaScript object can support.
These each correspond to a ``JsProxy`` type flag. There are also two additional
flags ``IS_PY_JSON_DICT`` and ``IS_PY_JSON_SEQUENCE`` which are set by the
``JsProxy.as_py_json()`` method and do not reflect properties of the underlying
JavaScript object.

``HAS_GET``
    Signals whether or not the JavaScript object has a ``get()``
    method. If present, used to implement ``__getitem__`` on the ``JsProxy``.

``HAS_HAS``
    Signals whether or not the JavaScript object has a ``has()`` method. If
    present, used to implement ``__contains__`` on the ``JsProxy``.

``HAS_INCLUDES``
    Signals whether or not the JavaScript object has an ``includes()`` method.
    If present, used to implement ``__contains__`` on the ``JsProxy``. We prefer
    to use ``has()`` to ``includes()`` if both are present.

``HAS_LENGTH``
    Signals whether or not the JavaScript object has a ``length`` or ``size``
    property. Used to implement ``__len__`` on the ``JsProxy``.

``HAS_SET``
    Signals whether or not the JavaScript object has a ``set()`` method. If
    present, used to implement ``__setitem__`` on the ``JsProxy``.

``HAS_DISPOSE``
    Signals whether or not the JavaScript object has a ``[Symbol.dispose]()``
    method. If present, used to implement ``__enter__`` and ``__exit__``.

``IS_ARRAY``
    Signals whether ``Array.isArray()`` applied to the JavaScript object returns
    ``true``. If present,  the ``JsProxy`` will be an instance of
    ``collections.abc.MutableSequence``.

``IS_ARRAY_LIKE``
    We set this if ``Array.isArray()`` returns ``false`` and the object has a
    ``length`` property and ``IS_ITERABLE``. If present, the ``JsProxy`` will be
    an instance of ``collections.abc.Sequence``. This is the case for many
    interfaces defined in the webidl such as
    `NodeList <https://github.com/jsdom/jsdom/blob/main/lib/jsdom/living/nodes/NodeList.webidl>`_

``IS_CALLABLE``
    Signals whether the ``typeof`` the JavaScript object is ``"function"``. If
    present, used to implement ``__call__`` on the ``JsProxy``.

``IS_ERROR``
    Signals whether the JavaScript object is an ``Error``. If so, the
    ``JsProxy`` it will subclass ``Exception`` so it can be raised.

``IS_GENERATOR``
    Signals whether the JavaScript object is a generator. If so, the ``JsProxy``
    will be an instance of ``collections.abc.Generator``.

``IS_ITERABLE``
    Signals whether the JavaScript object has a ``[Symbol.iterator]`` method or
    the ``IS_PY_JSON_DICT`` flag is set. If so, we use it to implement
    ``__iter__`` on the ``JsProxy``.

``IS_ITERATOR``
    Signals whether the JavaScript object has a ``next()`` method and no
    ``[Symbol.asyncIterator]`` method. If so, we use it to implement
    ``__next__`` on the ``JsProxy``. (If there is a ``[Symbol.asyncIterator]``
    method, we assume that the ``next()`` method should be used to implement
    ``__anext__``.)

``IS_PY_JSON_DICT``
    This is set on a ``JsProxy`` by the ``as_py_json()`` method if it is not an
    ``Array``. When this is set, ``__getitem__`` on the ``JsProxy`` will turn
    into attribute access on the JavaScript object. Also, the return values from
    iterating over the proxy or indexing it will also have ``IS_PY_JSON_DICT``
    or ``IS_PY_JSON_SEQUENCE`` set as appropriate.

``IS_PY_JSON_SEQUENCE``
    This is set on a ``JsProxy`` by the ``as_py_json()`` method if it is an
    ``Array``. When this is set, when indexing or iterating the ``JsProxy``
    we'll call ``as_py_json()`` on the result.

``IS_MAPPING``
    We set this if the flags ``HAS_GET``, ``HAS_LENGTH``, and ``IS_ITERABLE``
    are set, or if ``IS_PY_JSON_DICT`` is set. In this case, the ``JsProxy``
    will be an instance of ``collections.abc.Mapping``.

``IS_MUTABLE_MAPPING``
    We set this if the flags ``IS_MAPPING`` and ``HAS_SET`` are set or if
    ``IS_PY_JSON_DICT`` is set. In this case, the ``JsProxy`` will be an
    instance of ``collections.abc.MutableMapping``.


Creating a ``JsProxy``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To create a ``JsProxy`` from a JavaScript object and a value ``jsthis`` we do the
following steps:

1. calculate the appropriate type flags for the JavaScript object
2. get or create and cache an appropriate ``JsProxy`` class with the mixins
   appropriate for the set  of type flags that are set
3. instantiate the class with a reference to the JavaScript object and the
   ``jsthis`` value.

The value ``jsthis`` is used to determine the value of ``this`` when calling a
function. If ``jsobj`` is not callable, is has no effect.

Here is pseudocode for the functions ``create_jsproxy`` and
``create_jsproxy_with_flags``:

.. code-block:: python

    def create_jsproxy(jsobj, jsthis=Js_undefined):
        # For the definition of ``compute_type_flags``, see "Determining which flags to set".
        return create_jsproxy_with_flags(compute_type_flags(jsobj), jsobj, jsthis)

    def create_jsproxy_with_flags(type_flags, jsobj, jsthis):
        cls = get_jsproxy_class(type_flags)
        return cls.__new__(jsobj, jsthis)

The most important logic is for creating the classes, which works approximately
as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    @functools.cache
    def get_jsproxy_class(type_flags):
        flag_mixin_pairs = [
            (HAS_GET, JsProxyHasGetMixin),
            (HAS_HAS, JsProxyHasHasMixin),
            # ...
            (IS_PY_JSON_DICT, JsPyJsonDictMixin)
        ]
        bases = [mixin for flag, mixin in flag_mixin_pairs if flag & type_flags]
        bases.insert(0, JsProxy)
        if type_flags & IS_ERROR:
            # We want JsException to be pickleable so it needs a distinct name
            name = "pyodide.ffi.JsException"
            bases.append(Exception)
        else:
            name = "pyodide.ffi.JsProxy"
        ns = {"_js_type_flags": type_flags}
        # Note: The actual way that we build the class does not result in the
        # mixins appearing as entries on the mro.
        return JsProxyMeta.__new__(JsProxyMeta, name, tuple(bases), ns)


The ``JsProxy`` Metaclass
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This metaclass overrides subclass checks so that if one ``JsProxy`` class has a
superset of the flags of another ``JsProxy`` class, we report it as a subclass.

.. code:: python

    class _JsProxyMetaClass(type):
        def __instancecheck__(cls, instance):
            return cls.__subclasscheck__(type(instance))

        def __subclasscheck__(cls, subcls):
            if type.__subclasscheck__(cls, subcls):
                return True
            if not hasattr(subclass, "_js_type_flags"):
                return False

            subcls_flags = subcls._js_type_flags
            # Check whether the flags on subcls are a subset of the flags on cls
            return cls._js_type_flags & subcls_flags == subcls_flags


The ``JsProxy`` Base Class
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The most complicated part of the ``JsProxy`` base class is the implementation of
``__getattribute__``, ``__setattr__``, and ``__delattr__``. For
``__getattribute__``, we first check if an attribute is defined on the Python
object itself by calling ``object.__getattribute__()``. Otherwise, we look up
the attribute on the JavaScript object.


For ``__setattr__`` and ``__delattr__``, we set the keys "__loader__",
"__name__", "__package__", "__path__", and "__spec__" on the Python object
itself. All other values are set/deleted on the underlying JavaScript object.
This is to allow JavaScript objects to serve as Python modules without modifying
them.

As an odd special case, if the object is an ``Array``, we filter out the
``keys`` method. We also remove it from the results of ``dir()``. This is to
ensure that ``dict.update()`` behaves correctly when passed a JavaScript
``Array``. We want the following behavior:

.. code:: python

    d = {}
    d.update(run_js("[['a', 'b'], [1, 2]]"))
    assert d == {"a" : "b", 1 : 2}
    # The result if we didn't filter out Array.keys would be as follows:
    assert d != {1 : ['a', 'b'], 2: [1, 2]}

A possible alternative would be to teach add special case handling for
JavaScript arrays to ``dict.update()``.

It is common for JavaScript objects to have important methods that are named the
same thing as a Python reserved word (for example, ``Array.from``,
``Promise.then``). We access these from Python using the valid identifiers
``from_`` and ``then_``. If we want to access a JavaScript property called
``then_`` we access it from ``then__`` and so on. So if the attribute is a
Python reserved word followed by one or more underscores, we remove one
underscore from the end.   The following helper function is used for this:

.. code:: python

    def normalize_python_reserved_words(attr):
        stripped = attr.strip("_")
        if not is_python_reserved_word(stripped):
            return attr
        if stripped != attr:
            return attr[:-1]
        return attr

We need the following JavaScript function to implement ``__bool__``. In
JavaScript, empty containers are truthy but in Python they should be falsey, so
we detect empty containers and return ``false``.

.. code:: javascript

    function js_bool(val) {
        // if it's a falsey JS object, return false
        if (!val) {
            return false;
        }
        // We also want to return false on container types with size 0.
        if (val.size === 0) {
            // Return true for HTML elements even if they have a size of zero.
            if (val instanceof HTMLElement) {
                return true;
            }
            return false;
        }
        // A function with zero arguments has a length property equal to
        // zero. Make sure we return true for this.
        if (val.length === 0 && Array.isArray(val)) {
            return false;
        }
        // An empty buffer
        if (val.byteLength === 0) {
            return false;
        }
        return true;

    }

The following helper function is used to implement ``__dir__``. It walks the
prototype chain and accumulates all keys, filtering out keys that start with
numbers (not valid Python identifiers) and reversing the
``normalize_python_reserved_words`` transform. We also filter out the
``Array.keys`` method.

.. code:: javascript

    function js_dir(jsobj) {
        let result = [];
        let orig = jsobj;
        do {
            let keys = Object.getOwnPropertyNames(jsobj);
            result.push(...keys);
        } while ((jsobj = Object.getPrototypeOf(jsobj)));
        // Filter out numbers
        result = result.filter((s) => {
            let c = s.charCodeAt(0);
            return c < 48 || c > 57;
        });

        // Filter out "keys" key from an array
        if (Array.isArray(orig)) {
            result = result.filter((s) => {
                return s !== "keys";
            });
        }

        // If the key is a reserved word followed by 0 or more underscores,
        // add an extra underscore to reverse the transformation applied by
        // normalizeReservedWords.
        result = result.map((word) =>
            isReservedWord(word.replace(/_*$/, "")) ? word + "_" : word,
        );

        return result;
    };


.. code:: python

    class JsProxy:
        def __getattribute__(self, attr):
            try:
                return object.__getattribute__(self, attr)
            except AttributeError:
                pass
            if attr == "keys" and Array.isArray(self):
                raise AttributeError(attr)

            attr = normalize_python_reserved_words(attr)
            js_getattr = run_js(
                """
                (jsobj, attr) => jsobj[attr]
                """
            )
            js_hasattr = run_js(
                """
                (jsobj, attr) => attr in jsobj
                """
            )
            result = js_getattr(self, attr)
            if isjsfunction(result):
                result = result.__get__(self)
            if result is None and not js_hasattr(self, attr):
                raise AttributeError(attr)
            return result

        def __setattr__(self, attr, value):
            if attr in ["__loader__", "__name__", "__package__", "__path__", "__spec__"]:
                return object.__setattr__(self, attr, value)
            attr = normalize_python_reserved_words(attr)
            js_setattr = run_js(
                """
                (jsobj, attr) => {
                    jsobj[attr] = value;
                }
                """
            )
            js_setattr(self, attr, value)

        def __delattr__(self, attr):
            if attr in ["__loader__", "__name__", "__package__", "__path__", "__spec__"]:
                return object.__delattr__(self, attr)
            attr = normalize_python_reserved_words(attr)
            js_delattr = run_js(
                """
                (jsobj, attr) => {
                    delete jsobj[attr];
                }
                """
            )
            js_delattr(self, attr)

        def __dir__(self):
            return object.__dir__(self) + js_dir(self)

        def __eq__(self, other):
            if not isinstance(other, JsProxy):
                return False
            js_eq = run_js("(x, y) => x === y")
            return js_eq(self, other)

        def __ne__(self, other):
            if not isinstance(other, JsProxy):
                return True
            js_neq = run_js("(x, y) => x !== y")
            return js_neq(self, other)

        def __repr__(self):
            js_repr = run_js("x => x.toString()")
            return js_repr(self)

        def __bool__(self):
            return js_bool(self)

        @property
        def js_id(self):
            """
            This returns an integer with the property that jsproxy1 == jsproxy2
            if and only if jsproxy1.js_id == jsproxy2.js_id. There is no way to
            express the implementation in pseudocode.
            """
            raise NotImplementedError

        def as_py_json(self):
            """
            This is actually a mixin method. We leave it out if any of the flags
            IS_CALLABLE, IS_DOUBLE_PROXY, IS_ERROR, or IS_ITERATOR
            is set.
            """
            flags = self._js_type_flags
            if (flags & (IS_ARRAY | IS_ARRAY_LIKE)):
                flags |= IS_PY_JSON_SEQUENCE
            else:
                flags |= IS_PY_JSON_DICT
            return create_jsproxy_with_flags(flags, self, self.jsthis)

        def to_py(self, *, depth=-1, default_converter=None):
            """
            See section on deep conversions.
            """
            ...

        def object_entries(self):
            js_object_entries = run_js("x => Object.entries(x)")
            return js_object_entries(self)

        def object_keys(self):
            js_object_keys = run_js("x => Object.keys(x)")
            return js_object_keys(self)

        def object_values(self):
            js_object_values = run_js("x => Object.values(x)")
            return js_object_values(self)

        def to_weakref(self):
            js_weakref = run_js("x => new WeakRef(x)")
            return js_weakref(self)

We need the following function which calls the ``as_py_json()`` method on
``value`` if it is present:

.. code-block:: python

    def maybe_as_py_json(value):
        if (
            isinstance(value, JsProxy)
            and hasattr(value, as_py_json)
        ):
            return value.as_py_json()
        return value


Determining Which Flags to Set
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We need the helper function ``getTypeTag``:

.. code:: javascript

    function getTypeTag(x) {
        try {
            return Object.prototype.toString.call(x);
        } catch (e) {
            // Catch and ignore errors
            return "";
        }
    }

We use the following function to determine which flags to set:

.. code:: javascript

    function compute_type_flags(obj, is_py_json) {
        let type_flags = 0;

        const typeTag = getTypeTag(obj);
        const hasLength =
            isArray || (hasProperty(obj, "length") && typeof obj !== "function");

        SET_FLAG_IF_HAS_METHOD(HAS_GET, "get");
        SET_FLAG_IF_HAS_METHOD(HAS_SET, "set");
        SET_FLAG_IF_HAS_METHOD(HAS_HAS, "has");
        SET_FLAG_IF_HAS_METHOD(HAS_INCLUDES, "includes");
        SET_FLAG_IF(
            HAS_LENGTH,
            hasProperty(obj, "size") || hasLength
        );
        SET_FLAG_IF_HAS_METHOD(HAS_DISPOSE, Symbol.dispose);
        SET_FLAG_IF(IS_CALLABLE, typeof obj === "function");
        SET_FLAG_IF(IS_ARRAY, Array.isArray(obj));
        SET_FLAG_IF(
            IS_ARRAY_LIKE,
            !isArray && hasLength && (type_flags & IS_ITERABLE));
        SET_FLAG_IF(IS_DOUBLE_PROXY, isPyProxy(obj));
        SET_FLAG_IF(IS_GENERATOR, typeTag === "[object Generator]");
        SET_FLAG_IF_HAS_METHOD(IS_ITERABLE, Symbol.iterator);
        SET_FLAG_IF(
            IS_ERROR,
            hasProperty(obj, "name") &&
            hasProperty(obj, "message") &&
            (hasProperty(obj, "stack") || constructorName === "DOMException") &&
            !(type_flags & IS_CALLABLE)
        );

        if (is_py_json && type_flags & (IS_ARRAY | IS_ARRAY_LIKE)) {
            type_flags |= IS_PY_JSON_SEQUENCE;
        } else if (
            is_py_json &&
            !(type_flags & (IS_DOUBLE_PROXY | IS_ITERATOR | IS_CALLABLE | IS_ERROR))
        ) {
            type_flags |= IS_PY_JSON_DICT;
        }
        const mapping_flags = HAS_GET | HAS_LENGTH | IS_ITERABLE;
        const mutable_mapping_flags = mapping_flags | HAS_SET;
        SET_FLAG_IF(IS_MAPPING, type_flags & (mapping_flags === mapping_flags));
        SET_FLAG_IF(
            IS_MUTABLE_MAPPING,
            type_flags & (mutable_mapping_flags === mutable_mapping_flags),
        );

        SET_FLAG_IF(IS_MAPPING, type_flags & IS_PY_JSON_DICT);
        SET_FLAG_IF(IS_MUTABLE_MAPPING, type_flags & IS_PY_JSON_DICT);

        return type_flags;
    }

The ``HAS_GET`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If a JavaScript ``get()`` method is present, we define ``__getitem__`` as
follows. If a ``has()`` method is also present, we'll use it to decide whether
an ``undefined`` return value should be treated as a key error or as ``None``.
If no ``has()`` method is present, ``undefined`` is treated as ``None``.

.. code-block:: javascript

    function js_get(jsobj, item) {
        const result = jsobj.get(item);
        if (result !== undefined) {
            return result;
        }
        if (hasMethod(obj, "has") && !obj.has(key)) {
            throw new PythonKeyError(item);
        }
        return undefined;
    }

.. code-block:: python

    class JsProxyHasGetMixin:
        def __getitem__(self, item):
            result = js_get(self, item)
            if self._js_type_flags & IS_PY_JSON_DICT:
                result = maybe_as_py_json(result)
            return result

The ``HAS_SET`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If a ``set()`` method is present, we assume a ``delete()`` method is also
present and define ``__setitem__`` and ``__delitem__`` as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    class JsProxyHasSetMixin:
        def __setitem__(self, item, value):
            js_set = run_js(
                """
                (jsobj, item, value) => {
                    jsobj.set(item, value);
                }
                """
            )
            js_set(self, item, value)

        def __delitem__(self, item, value):
            js_delete = run_js(
                """
                (jsobj, item) => {
                    jsobj.delete(item);
                }
                """
            )
            js_delete(self, item)

The ``HAS_HAS`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: python

    class JsProxyHasHasMixin:
        def __contains__(self, item):
            js_has = run_js(
                """
                (jsobj, item) => jsobj.has(item);
                """
            )
            return js_has(self, item)


The ``HAS_INCLUDES`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: python

    class JsProxyHasIncludesMixin:
        def __contains__(self, item):
            js_includes = run_js(
                """
                (jsobj, item) => jsobj.includes(item);
                """
            )
            return js_includes(self, item)


The ``HAS_LENGTH`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We prefer to use the ``size`` attribute if present and a number and if not fall
back to returning the ``length``. If a JavaScript error is raised when looking
up either field, we allow it to propagate into Python as a
``JavaScriptException``.

.. code-block:: python

    class JsProxyHasLengthMixin:
        def __len__(self, item):
            js_len = run_js(
                """
                (jsobj) => {
                    const size = val.size;
                    if (typeof size === "number") {
                        return size;
                    }
                    return val.length
                }
                """
            )
            result = js_len(self)
            if not isinstance(result, int):
                raise TypeError("object does not have a valid length")
            if result < 0:
                raise ValueError("length of object is negative")
            return result

The ``HAS_DISPOSE`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This makes the ``JsProxy`` into a context manager where ``__enter__`` is a no-op
and ``__exit__`` calls the ``[Symbol.dispose]()`` method.

.. code-block:: python

    class JsProxyContextManagerMixin:
        def __enter__(self):
            return self

        def __exit__(self, type, value, traceback):
            js_symbol_dispose = run_js(
                """
                (jsobj) => jsobj[Symbol.dispose]()
                """
            )
            js_symbol_dispose(self)


The ``IS_ARRAY`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: javascript

    function js_array_slice(jsobj, length, start, stop, step) {
        let result;
        if (step === 1) {
            result = obj.slice(start, stop);
        } else {
            result = Array.from({ length }, (_, i) => obj[start + i * step]);
        }
        return result;
    }

    // we also use this for deletion by setting values to None
    function js_array_slice_assign(obj, slicelength, start, stop, step, values) {
        if (step === 1) {
            obj.splice(start, slicelength, ...(values ?? []));
            return;
        }
        if (values !== undefined) {
            for (let i = 0; i < slicelength; i++) {
                obj.splice(start + i * step, 1, values[i]);
            }
        }
        for (let i = slicelength - 1; i >= 0; i --) {
            obj.splice(start + i * step, 1);
        }
    }

.. code-block:: python

    class JsArrayMixin(MutableSequence, JsProxyHasLengthMixin):
        def __getitem__(self, index):
            if not isinstance(index, (int, slice)):
                raise TypeError("Expected index to be an int or a slice")
            length = len(self)
            js_array_get = run_js(
                """
                (jsobj, index) => jsobj[index]
                """
            )
            if isinstance(index, int):
                if index >= length:
                    raise IndexError(index)
                if index < -length:
                    raise IndexError(index)
                if index < 0:
                    index += length
                result = js_array_get(self, index)
                if self._js_type_flags & IS_PY_JSON_SEQUENCE:
                    result = maybe_as_py_json(result)
                return result
            start = index.start
            stop = index.stop
            step = index.step
            slicelength = PySlice_AdjustIndices(length, &start, &stop, &step)
            if (slicelength <= 0) {
                return _PyJsvArray_New();
            }
            result = js_array_slice(self, slicelength, start, stop, step)
            if self._js_type_flags & IS_PY_JSON_SEQUENCE:
                result = result.as_py_json()
            return result


        def __setitem__(self, index, value):
            if not isinstance(index, (int, slice)):
                raise TypeError("Expected index to be an int or a slice")
            length = len(self)
            js_array_set = run_js(
                """
                (jsobj, index, value) => { jsobj[index] = value; }
                """
            )
            if isinstance(index, int):
                if index >= length:
                    raise IndexError(index)
                if index < -length:
                    raise IndexError(index)
                if index < 0:
                    index += length
                result = js_array_set(self, index, value)
                return
            if not isinstance(value, Iterable):
                raise TypeError("must assign iterable to extended slice")
            seq = list(value)
            start = index.start
            stop = index.stop
            step = index.step
            slicelength = PySlice_AdjustIndices(length, &start, &stop, &step)
            if step != 1 and len(seq) != slicelength:
                raise TypeError(
                    f"attempted to assign sequence of length {len(seq)} to"
                    f"extended slice of length {slicelength}"
                )
            if step != 1 and slicelength == 0:
                return
            js_array_slice_assign(self, slicelength, start, stop, step, seq)

        def __delitem__(self, index):
            if not isinstance(index, (int, slice)):
                raise TypeError("Expected index to be an int or a slice")
            length = len(self)
            js_array_delete = run_js(
                """
                (jsobj, index) => { jsobj.splice(index, 1); }
                """
            )
            if isinstance(index, int):
                if index >= length:
                    raise IndexError(index)
                if index < -length:
                    raise IndexError(index)
                if index < 0:
                    index += length
                result = js_array_delete(self, index)
                return
            start = index.start
            stop = index.stop
            step = index.step
            slicelength = PySlice_AdjustIndices(length, &start, &stop, &step)
            if step != 1 and slicelength == 0:
                return
            js_array_slice_assign(self, slicelength, start, stop, step, None)

        def insert(self, pos, value):
            if not isinstance(pos, int):
                raise TypeError("Expected an integer")
            js_insert = run_js(
                """
                (jsarr, pos, value) => { jsarr.splice(pos, value); }
                """
            )
            js_insert(self, pos, value)

The ``IS_ARRAY_LIKE`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~


.. code-block:: python

    class JsArrayLikeMixin(MutableSequence, JsProxyHasLengthMixin):
        def __getitem__(self, index):
            if not isinstance(index, int):
                raise TypeError("Expected index to be an int")
            JsArrayMixin.__getitem__(self, index)

        def __setitem__(self, index, value):
            if not isinstance(index, int):
                raise TypeError("Expected index to be an int")
            JsArrayMixin.__setitem__(self, index, value)

        def __delitem__(self, index):
            if not isinstance(index, int):
                raise TypeError("Expected index to be an int")
            JsArrayMixin.__delitem__(self, index, value)

The ``IS_CALLABLE`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
We already gave more accurate C code for calling a ``JsCallable``. See in
particular the definition of ``JsMethod_ConvertArgs()`` given there.

.. code-block:: python

    class JsCallableMixin:
        def __get__(self, obj):
            """Return a new jsproxy bound to jsthis with the same JS object"""
            return create_jsproxy(self, jsthis=obj)

        def __call__(self, *args, **kwargs):
            """See the description of JsMethod_Vectorcall"""

        def new(self, *args, **kwargs):
            pyproxies = []
            jsargs = JsMethod_ConvertArgs(args, kwargs, pyproxies)

            do_construct = run_js(
                """
                (jsfunc, jsargs) =>
                    Reflect.construct(jsfunc, jsargs)
                """
            )
            result = do_construct(self, jsargs)
            msg = (
                "This borrowed proxy was automatically destroyed "
                "at the end of a function call."
            )
            for px in pyproxies:
                px.destroy(msg)
            return result

The ``IS_ERROR`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In this case, we inherit from both ``Exception`` and ``JsProxy``. We also make
sure that the resulting class is pickleable.

The ``IS_ITERABLE`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If the iterable has the ``IS_PY_JSON_DICT`` flag set, we iterate over the object
keys. Otherwise, call ``obj[Symbol.iterator]()``. If either
``IS_PY_JSON_SEQUENCE`` or ``IS_PY_JSON_DICT``, we call ``maybe_as_py_json`` on
the iteration results.

.. code-block:: python

    def wrap_with_maybe_as_py_json(it):
        try:
            while val := it.next()
                yield maybe_as_py_json(val)
        except StopIteration(result):
            return maybe_as_py_json(result)


    class JsIterableMixin:
        def __iter__(self):
            pyjson = self._js_type_flags & (IS_PY_JSON_SEQUENCE | IS_PY_JSON_DICT)
            pyjson_dict = self._js_type_flags & IS_PY_JSON_DICT
            js_get_iter = run_js(
                """
                (obj) => obj[Symbol.iterator]()
                """
            )

            if pyjson_dict:
                result = iter(self.object_keys())
            else:
                result = js_get_iter(self)

            if pyjson:
                result = wrap_with_maybe_as_py_json(result)
            return result


The ``IS_ITERATOR`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The JavaScript ``next`` method returns an ``IteratorResult`` which has a
``done`` field and a ``value`` field. If ``done`` is ``true``, we have to raise
a ``StopIteration`` exception to convert to the Python iterator protocol.

.. code-block:: python

    class JsIteratorMixin:
        def __iter__(self):
            return self

        def send(self, arg):
            js_next = run_js(
                """
                (obj, arg) => obj.next(arg)
                """
            )
            it_result = js_next(self, arg)
            value = it_result.value
            if it_result.done:
                raise StopIteration(value)
            return value

        def __next__(self):
            return self.send(None)


The ``IS_GENERATOR`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Python generators have a ``close()`` method which takes no arguments instead of
a ``return()`` method. We also have to translate ``gen.throw(GeneratorExit)``
into ``jsgen.return_()``. It is possible to call ``jsgen.return_(val)`` directly
if there is a need to return a specific value.

.. code-block:: python

    class JsGeneratorMixin(JsIteratorMixin):
        def throw(self, exc):
            if isinstance(exc, GeneratorExit):
                js_throw = run_js(
                    """
                    (obj, exc) => obj.return()
                    """
                )
            else:
                js_throw = run_js(
                    """
                    (obj, exc) => obj.throw(exc)
                    """
                )
            it_result = js_throw(self, exc)
            # if the error wasn't caught it will get raised back out.
            # now handle the case where the error got caught.
            value = it_result.value
            if self._js_type_flags & IS_PY_JSON_SEQUENCE:
                value = maybe_as_py_json(value)
            if it_result.done:
                raise StopIteration(value)
            return value

        def close(self):
            self.throw(GeneratorExit)

The ``IS_MAPPING`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If the ``IS_MAPPING`` flag is set, we implement all of the ``Mapping`` methods.
We only set this flag when there are enough other flags set that the abstract
``Mapping`` methods are defined. We use the default implementations for all the
mixin methods.

The ``IS_MUTABLE_MAPPING`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If the ``IS_MUTABLE_MAPPING`` flag is set, we implement all of the
``MutableMapping`` methods. We only set this flag when there are enough other
flags set that the abstract ``MutableMapping`` methods are defined. We use the
default implementations for all the mixin methods.


The ``IS_PY_JSON_SEQUENCE`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This flag only ever appears with ``IS_ARRAY``. It changes the behavior of
``JsArray.__getitem__`` to apply ``maybe_as_py_json()`` to the result.

The ``IS_PY_JSON_DICT`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: python

    class JsPyJsonDictMixin(MutableMapping):
        def __getitem__(self, key):
            if not isinstance(key, str):
                raise KeyError(key)
            js_get = run_js(
                """
                (jsobj, key) => jsobj[key]
                """
            )
            result = js_get(self, key)
            if result is None and not key in self:
                raise KeyError(key)
            return maybe_as_py_json(result)

        def __setitem__(self, key, value):
            if not isinstance(key, str):
                raise TypeError("only keys of type string are supported")
            js_set = run_js(
                """
                (jsobj, key, value) => {
                    jsobj[key] = value;
                }
                """
            )
            js_set(self, key, value)

        def __delitem__(self, key):
            if not isinstance(key, str):
                raise TypeError("only keys of type string are supported")
            if not key in self:
                raise KeyError(key)
            js_delete = run_js(
                """
                (jsobj, key) => {
                    delete jsobj[key];
                }
                """
            )
            js_delete(self, key)

        def __contains__(self, key):
            if not isinstance(key, str):
                return False
            js_contains = run_js(
                """
                (jsobj, key) => key in jsobj
                """
            )
            return js_contains(self, key)

        def __len__(self):
            return sum(1 for _ in self)

        def __iter__(self):
            # defined by IS_ITERABLE mixin, see implementation there.


The ``IS_DOUBLE_PROXY`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In this case the object is a ``JsProxy`` of a ``PyProxy``. We add an extra
``unwrap()`` method that returns the inner Python object.


PyProxy
-------

We define 12 mixins that a Python object may support that affect the type of the
PyProxy we make from it.

``HAS_GET``
    We set this flag if the Python object has a ``__getitem__`` method. If
    present, we use it to implement a ``get()`` method on the ``PyProxy``.

``HAS_SET``
    We set this flag if the Python object has a ``__setitem__`` method. If
    present, we use it to implement a ``set()`` method on the ``PyProxy``.

``HAS_CONTAINS``
    We set this flag if the Python object has a ``__contains__`` method. If
    present, we use it to implement a ``has()`` method on the ``PyProxy``.

``HAS_LENGTH``
    We set this flag if the Python object has a ``__len__`` method. If present,
    we use it to implement a ``length`` getter on the ``PyProxy``.

``IS_CALLABLE``
    We set this flag if the Python object has a ``__call__`` method. If present,
    we make the ``PyProxy`` callable.

``IS_DICT``
    We set this flag if the Python object is of exact type ``dict``. If present,
    we will make property ``pyproxy.some_property`` fall back to
    ``pyobj.__getitem__("some_property")`` if ``getattr(pyobj, "some_property")``
    raises an ``AttributeError``.

``IS_GENERATOR``
    We set this flag if the Python object is an instance of
    ``collections.abc.Generator``. If present, we make the ``PyProxy`` implement
    the methods of a JavaScript generator.

``IS_ITERABLE``
    We set this flag if the Python object has a ``__iter__`` method. If present,
    we use it to implement a ``[Symbol.iterator]`` method on the ``PyProxy``.

``IS_ITERATOR``
    We set this flag if the Python object has a ``__next__`` method. If present,
    we use it to implement a ``next()`` method on the ``PyProxy``.

``IS_SEQUENCE``
    We set this flag if the Python object is an instance of
    ``collections.abc.Sequence``. If it is present, we use it to implement all
    of the ``Array.prototype`` methods that don't mutate on the ``PyProxy``.

``IS_MUTABLE_SEQUENCE``
    We set this flag if the Python object is an instance of
    ``collections.abc.MutableSequence``. If it is present, we use it to implement
    all ``Array.prototype`` methods on the ``PyProxy``.

``IS_JS_JSON_DICT``
    We set this flag when the ``asJsJson()`` method is used on a dictionary. If
    this flag is set, property access on the ``PyProxy`` will _only_ look at
    values from ``__getitem__`` and not at attributes on the Python object. We
    also will call ``asJsJson()`` on the result of indexing or iterating
    the ``PyProxy``.

``IS_JS_JSON_SEQUENCE``
    We set this flag when the ``asJsJson()`` is used on a ``Sequence``. If this
    flag is set, we will call ``asJsJson()`` on the result of indexing or
    iterating the ``PyProxy``.


A ``PyProxy`` is made up of a mixture of a JavaScript class and a collection of
ES6 ``Proxy`` handlers. Depending on which flags are present, we construct our
class out of an appropriate collection of mixins and an appropriate choice of
handlers.

When a ``PyProxy`` is created, we increment the reference count of the wrapped
Python object. When a ``PyProxy`` is destroyed, we decrement the reference count
and mark it as destroyed. As a result, if we attempt to do anything with the
``PyProxy``, we will call ``_Py_js2python()`` on it and an error will be thrown.

Creating a ``PyProxy``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Given a collection of type flags, we use the following function to generate the
``PyProxy`` class:

.. code-block:: javascript

    let pyproxyClassMap = new Map();
    function getPyProxyClass(flags: number) {
        let result = pyproxyClassMap.get(flags);
        if (result) {
            return result;
        }
        let descriptors: any = {};
        const FLAG_MIXIN_PAIRS: [number, any][] = [
            [HAS_CONTAINS, PyContainsMixin],
            // ... other flag mixin pairs
            [IS_MUTABLE_SEQUENCE, PyMutableSequenceMixin],
        ];
        for (let [feature_flag, methods] of FLAG_MIXIN_PAIRS) {
            if (flags & feature_flag) {
                Object.assign(
                    descriptors,
                    Object.getOwnPropertyDescriptors(methods.prototype),
                );
            }
        }
        // Use base constructor (just throws an error if construction is attempted).
        descriptors.constructor = Object.getOwnPropertyDescriptor(
            PyProxyProto,
            "constructor",
        );
        // $$flags static field
        Object.assign(
            descriptors,
            Object.getOwnPropertyDescriptors({ $$flags: flags }),
        );
        // We either inherit PyProxyFunction as the base class if we're callable or
        // from PyProxy if we're not.
        const superProto = flags & IS_CALLABLE ? PyProxyFunctionProto : PyProxyProto;
        const subProto = Object.create(superProto, descriptors);
        function NewPyProxyClass() {}
        NewPyProxyClass.prototype = subProto;
        pyproxyClassMap.set(flags, NewPyProxyClass);
        return NewPyProxyClass;
    }

To create a ``PyProxy`` we also need to be able to get the appropriate handlers:

.. code-block:: javascript

    function getPyProxyHandlers(flags) {
        if (flags & IS_JS_JSON_DICT) {
            return PyProxyJsJsonDictHandlers;
        }
        if (flags & IS_DICT) {
            return PyProxyDictHandlers;
        }
        if (flags & IS_SEQUENCE) {
            return PyProxySequenceHandlers;
        }
        return PyProxyHandlers;
    }

We use the following function to create the target object for the ES6 proxy:

.. code-block:: javascript

    function createTarget(flags) {
        const pyproxyClass = getPyProxyClass(flags);
        if (!(flags & IS_CALLABLE)) {
            return Object.create(cls.prototype);
        }
        // In this case we are effectively subclassing Function in order to ensure
        // that the proxy is callable. With a Content Security Protocol that doesn't
        // allow unsafe-eval, we can't invoke the Function constructor directly. So
        // instead we create a function in the universally allowed way and then use
        // `setPrototypeOf`. The documentation for `setPrototypeOf` says to use
        // `Object.create` or `Reflect.construct` instead for performance reasons
        // but neither of those work here.
        const target = function () {};
        Object.setPrototypeOf(target, cls.prototype);
        // Remove undesirable properties added by Function constructor. Note: we
        // can't remove "arguments" or "caller" because they are not configurable
        // and not writable
        delete target.length;
        delete target.name;
        // prototype isn't configurable so we can't delete it but it is writable.
        target.prototype = undefined;
        return target;
    }

``createPyProxy`` takes the following options:

flags
    If this is passed, we use the passed flags rather than feature
    detecting the object again.

props
    Information that not shared with other PyProxies of the same lifetime.

shared
    Data that is shared between all proxies with the same lifetime as this one.

gcRegister
    Should we register this with the JavaScript garbage collector?


.. code-block:: javascript

    const pyproxyAttrsSymbol = Symbol("pyproxy.attrs");
    function createPyProxy(
        pyObjectPtr: number,
        {
            flags,
            props,
            shared,
            gcRegister,
        }
    ) {
        if (gcRegister === undefined) {
            // register by default
            gcRegister = true;
        }

        // See the section "Determining which flags to set" for the definition of
        // get_pyproxy_flags
        const pythonGetFlags = makePythonFunction("get_pyproxy_flags");
        flags ??= pythonGetFlags(pyObjectPtr);
        const target = createTarget(flags);
        const handlers = getPyProxyHandlers(flags);
        const proxy = new Proxy(target, handlers);

        props = Object.assign(
            { isBound: false, captureThis: false, boundArgs: [], roundtrip: false },
            props,
        );

        // If shared was passed the new PyProxy will have a shared lifetime
        // with some other PyProxy.
        // This happens in asJsJson(), bind(), and captureThis().
        // It specifically does not happen in copy()
        if (!shared) {
            shared = {
                pyObjectPtr,
                destroyed_msg: undefined,
                gcRegistered: false,
            };
            _Py_IncRef(pyObjectPtr);
            if (gcRegister) {
                gcRegisterPyProxy(shared);
            }
        }
        target[pyproxyAttrsSymbol] = { shared, props };
        return proxy;
    }

The ``PyProxy`` Base Class
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The default handlers are as follows:

.. code-block:: javascript

    function filteredHasKey(jsobj, jskey, filterProto) {
        let result = jskey in jsobj;
        if (jsobj instanceof Function) {
          // If we are a PyProxy of a callable we have to subclass function so that if
          // someone feature detects callables with `instanceof Function` it works
          // correctly. But the callable might have attributes `name` and `length` and
          // we don't want to shadow them with the values from `Function.prototype`.
          result &&= !(
            ["name", "length", "caller", "arguments"].includes(jskey) ||
            // we are required by JS law to return `true` for `"prototype" in pycallable`
            // but we are allowed to return the value of `getattr(pycallable, "prototype")`.
            // So we filter prototype out of the "get" trap but not out of the "has" trap
            (filterProto && jskey === "prototype")
          );
        }
        return result;
    }

    const PyProxyHandlers = {
        isExtensible() {
            return true;
        },
        has(jsobj, jskey) {
            // Must report "prototype" in proxy when we are callable.
            // (We can return the wrong value from "get" handler though.)
            if (filteredHasKey(jsobj, jskey, false)) {
                return true;
            }
            // hasattr will crash if given a Symbol.
            if (typeof jskey === "symbol") {
                return false;
            }
            if (jskey.startsWith("$")) {
                jskey = jskey.slice(1);
            }
            const pythonHasAttr = makePythonFunction("hasattr");
            return pythonHasAttr(jsobj, jskey);
        },
        get(jsobj, jskey) {
            // Preference order:
            // 1. stuff from JavaScript
            // 2. the result of Python getattr
            // pythonGetAttr will crash if given a Symbol.
            if (typeof jskey === "symbol" || filteredHasKey(jsobj, jskey, true)) {
                return Reflect.get(jsobj, jskey);
            }
            if (jskey.startsWith("$")) {
                jskey = jskey.slice(1);
            }
            // 2. The result of getattr
            const pythonGetAttr = makePythonFunction("getattr");
            return pythonGetAttr(jsobj, jskey);
        },
        set(jsobj, jskey, jsval) {
            let descr = Object.getOwnPropertyDescriptor(jsobj, jskey);
            if (descr && !descr.writable && !descr.set) {
            return false;
            }
            // pythonSetAttr will crash if given a Symbol.
            if (typeof jskey === "symbol" || filteredHasKey(jsobj, jskey, true)) {
                return Reflect.set(jsobj, jskey, jsval);
            }
            if (jskey.startsWith("$")) {
                jskey = jskey.slice(1);
            }
            const pythonSetAttr = makePythonFunction("setattr");
            pythonSetAttr(jsobj, jskey, jsval);
            return true;
        },
        deleteProperty(jsobj, jskey: string | symbol): boolean {
            let descr = Object.getOwnPropertyDescriptor(jsobj, jskey);
            if (descr && !descr.configurable) {
                // Must return "false" if "jskey" is a nonconfigurable own property.
                // Strict mode JS will throw an error here saying that the property cannot
                // be deleted.
                return false;
            }
            if (typeof jskey === "symbol" || filteredHasKey(jsobj, jskey, true)) {
                return Reflect.deleteProperty(jsobj, jskey);
            }
            if (jskey.startsWith("$")) {
                jskey = jskey.slice(1);
            }
            const pythonDelAttr = makePythonFunction("delattr");
            pythonDelAttr(jsobj, jskey);
            return true;
        },
        ownKeys(jsobj) {
            const pythonDir = makePythonFunction("dir");
            const result = pythonDir(jsobj).toJs();
            result.push(...Reflect.ownKeys(jsobj));
            return result;
        },
        apply(jsobj: PyProxy & Function, jsthis: any, jsargs: any): any {
            return jsobj.apply(jsthis, jsargs);
        },
    };

And the base class has the following methods:

.. code-block:: javascript

    class PyProxy {
        constructor() {
            throw new TypeError("PyProxy is not a constructor");
        }
        get [Symbol.toStringTag]() {
            return "PyProxy";
        }
        static [Symbol.hasInstance](obj: any): obj is PyProxy {
            return [PyProxy, PyProxyFunction].some((cls) =>
                Function.prototype[Symbol.hasInstance].call(cls, obj),
            );
        }
        get type() {
            const pythonType = makePythonFunction(`
                def python_type(obj):
                    ty = type(obj)
                    if ty.__module__  in ['builtins', 'main']:
                        return ty.__name__
                    return ty.__module__ + "." + ty.__name__
            `);
            return pythonType(this);
        }
        toString() {
            const pythonStr = makePythonFunction("str");
            return pythonStr(this);
        }
        destroy(options) {
            const { shared } = proxy[pyproxyAttrsSymbol];
            if (!shared.pyObjectPtr) {
                // already destroyed
                return;
            }
            shared.pyObjectPtr = 0;
            shared.destroyed_msg = options.message ?? "Object has already been destroyed";
            _Py_DecRef(shared.pyObjectPtr);
        }
        [Symbol.dispose]() {
            this.destroy();
        }
        copy() {
            const { shared, props } = proxy[pyproxyAttrsSymbol];
            // Don't pass shared as an option since we want this new PyProxy to
            // have a distinct lifetime from the one we are copying.
            return createPyProxy(shared.pyObjectPtr, {
                flags: this.$$flags,
                props: attrs.props,
            });
        }
        toJs(options) {
            // See the definition of to_js in "Deep conversions".
        }
    }

Determining Which Flags to Set
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We separate this out into a component ``get_type_flags`` that computes flags
which only depends on the type and a component that also depends on whether the
``PyProxy`` has beenJsJson

.. code-block:: python

    def get_type_flags(ty):
        from collections.abc import Generator, MutableSequence, Sequence

        flags = 0
        if hasattr(ty, "__len__"):
            flags |= HAS_LENGTH
        if hasattr(ty, "__getitem__"):
            flags |= HAS_GET
        if hasattr(ty, "__setitem__"):
            flags |= HAS_SET
        if hasattr(ty, "__contains__"):
            flags |= HAS_CONTAINS
        if ty is dict:
            # Currently we don't set this on subclasses.
            flags |= IS_DICT
        if hasattr(ty, "__call__"):
            flags |= IS_CALLABLE
        if hasattr(ty, "__iter__"):
            flags |= IS_ITERABLE
        if hasattr(ty, "__next__"):
            flags |= IS_ITERATOR
        if issubclass(ty, Generator):
            flags |= IS_GENERATOR
        if issubclass(ty, Sequence):
            flags |= IS_SEQUENCE
        if issubclass(ty, MutableSequence):
            flags |= IS_MUTABLE_SEQUENCE
        return flags

    def get_pyproxy_flags(obj, is_js_json):
        flags = get_type_flags(type(obj))
        if not is_js_json:
            return flags
        if flags & IS_SEQUENCE:
            flags |= IS_JS_JSON_SEQUENCE
        elif flags & HAS_GET:
            flags |= IS_JS_JSON_DICT
        return flags


The ``HAS_GET`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: javascript

    const pythonGetItem = makePythonFunction(`
        def getitem(obj, key):
            return obj[key]
    `);
    class PyProxyGetItemMixin {
        get(key) {
            let result = pythonGetItem(this, key);
            const isJsJson = !!(this.$$flags & (IS_JS_JSON_DICT | IS_JS_JSON_SEQUENCE));
            if (isJsJson && result.asJsJson) {
                result = result.asJsJson();
            }
            return result;
        }
        asJsJson() {
            const flags = this.$$flags | IS_JS_JSON_DICT;
            const { shared, props } = this[pyproxyAttrsSymbol];
            // Note: The PyProxy created here has the same lifetime as the PyProxy it is
            // created from. Destroying either destroys both.
            return createPyProxy(shared.ptr, { flags, shared, props });
        }
    }

The ``HAS_SET`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: javascript

    class PyProxySetItemMixin {
        set(key, value) {
            const pythonSetItem = makePythonFunction(`
                def setitem(obj, key, value):
                    obj[key] = value
            `);
            pythonSetItem(this, key, value);
        }
        delete(key) {
            const pythonDelItem = makePythonFunction(`
                def delitem(obj, key):
                    del obj[key]
            `);
            pythonDelItem(this, key);
        }
    }

The ``HAS_CONTAINS`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: javascript

    const pythonHasItem = makePythonFunction(`
        def hasitem(obj, key):
            return key in obj
    `);
    class PyContainsMixin {
        has(key) {
            return pythonHasItem(this, key);
        }
    }

The ``HAS_LENGTH`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: javascript

    const pythonLength = makePythonFunction("len");
    class PyLengthMixin {
        get length() : number {
            return pythonLength(this);
        }
    }

The ``IS_CALLABLE`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We have to make a custom prototype and class so that this inherits from both
``PyProxy`` and ``Function``:

.. code-block:: javascript

    const PyProxyFunctionProto = Object.create(
        Function.prototype,
        Object.getOwnPropertyDescriptors(PyProxy.prototype),
    );
    function PyProxyFunction() {}
    PyProxyFunction.prototype = PyProxyFunctionProto;

We use the following helper function which inserts ``this`` as the first
argument if ``captureThis`` is ``true`` and adds any bound arguments.

.. code-block:: javascript

        function _adjustArgs(pyproxy, jsthis, jsargs) {
            const { props } = this[pyproxyAttrsSymbol];
            const { captureThis, boundArgs, boundThis, isBound } = props;
            if (captureThis) {
                if (isBound) {
                    return [boundThis].concat(boundArgs, jsargs);
                } else {
                    return [jsthis].concat(jsargs);
                }
            }
            if (isBound) {
                return boundArgs.concat(jsargs);
            }
            return jsargs;
        }

Then we implement the following methods. ``apply()``, ``call()``, and ``bind()``
are methods from ``Function.prototype``. ``callKwargs()`` and ``captureThis()``
are special to ``PyProxy``


.. code-block:: javascript

    export class PyCallableMixin {
        apply(thisArg, jsargs) {
            // Convert jsargs to an array using ordinary .apply in order to match the
            // behavior of .apply very accurately.
            jsargs = function (...args) {
                return args;
            }.apply(undefined, jsargs);
            jsargs = _adjustArgs(this, thisArg, jsargs);
            const pyObjectPtr = this[pyproxyAttrsSymbol].shared.pyObjectPtr;
            return callPyObjectKwargs(pyObjectPtr, jsargs, {});
        }
        call(thisArg, ...jsargs) {
            jsargs = _adjustArgs(this, thisArg, jsargs);
            const pyObjectPtr = this[pyproxyAttrsSymbol].shared.pyObjectPtr;
            return callPyObjectKwargs(pyObjectPtr, jsargs, {});
        }

        /**
         * Call the function with keyword arguments. The last argument must be an
         * object with the keyword arguments.
         */
        callKwargs(...jsargs) {
            jsargs = _adjustArgs(this, thisArg, jsargs);
            if (jsargs.length === 0) {
                throw new TypeError(
                    "callKwargs requires at least one argument (the kwargs object)",
                );
            }
            let kwargs = jsargs.pop();
            if (
                kwargs.constructor !== undefined &&
                kwargs.constructor.name !== "Object"
            ) {
                throw new TypeError("kwargs argument is not an object");
            }
            const pyObjectPtr = this[pyproxyAttrsSymbol].shared.pyObjectPtr;
            return callPyObjectKwargs(pyObjectPtr, jsargs, kwargs);
        }
        /**
         * This is our implementation of Function.prototype.bind().
         */
        bind(thisArg, ...jsargs) {
            let { shared, props } = this[pyproxyAttrsSymbol];
            const { boundArgs: boundArgsOld, boundThis: boundThisOld, isBound } = props;
            let boundThis = thisArg;
            if (isBound) {
                boundThis = boundThisOld;
            }
            const boundArgs = boundArgsOld.concat(jsargs);
            props = Object.assign({}, props, {
                boundArgs,
                isBound: true,
                boundThis,
            });
            return createPyProxy(shared.ptr, {
                shared,
                flags: this.$$flags,
                props,
            });
        }
        /**
          * This method makes a new PyProxy where ``this`` is passed as the
          * first argument to the Python function. The new PyProxy has the
          * same lifetime as the original.
          */
        captureThis() {
            let { props, shared } = this[pyproxyAttrsSymbol];
            props = Object.assign({}, props, {
                captureThis: true,
            });
            return createPyProxy(shared.ptr, {
                shared,
                flags: this.$$flags,
                props,
            });
        }
    }


The ``IS_DICT`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``IS_DICT`` mixin does not include any extra methods but it uses a special
set of handlers. These handlers are a hybrid between the normal handlers and the
``JS_JSON_DICT`` handlers. We first check whether ``hasattr(d, property)`` and
if so return ``d.property``. If not, we return ``d.get(property, None)``. The
other methods all work similarly. See the ``IS_JS_JSON_DICT`` flag for the
definitions of those handlers.

.. code-block:: javascript

    const PyProxyDictHandlers = {
        isExtensible(): boolean {
            return true;
        },
        has(jsobj: PyProxy, jskey: string | symbol): boolean {
            if (PyProxyHandlers.has(jsobj, jskey)) {
                return true;
            }
            return PyProxyJsJsonDictHandlers.has(jsobj, jskey);
        },
        get(jsobj: PyProxy, jskey: string | symbol): any {
            let result = PyProxyHandlers.get(jsobj, jskey);
            if (result !== undefined || PyProxyHandlers.has(jsobj, jskey)) {
                return result;
            }
            return PyProxyJsJsonDictHandlers.get(jsobj, jskey);
        },
        set(jsobj: PyProxy, jskey: string | symbol, jsval: any): boolean {
            if (PyProxyHandlers.has(jsobj, jskey)) {
                return PyProxyHandlers.set(jsobj, jskey, jsval);
            }
            return PyProxyJsJsonDictHandlers.set(jsobj, jskey, jsval);
        },
        deleteProperty(jsobj: PyProxy, jskey: string | symbol): boolean {
            if (PyProxyHandlers.has(jsobj, jskey)) {
                return PyProxyHandlers.deleteProperty(jsobj, jskey);
            }
            return PyProxyJsJsonDictHandlers.deleteProperty(jsobj, jskey);
        },
        getOwnPropertyDescriptor(jsobj: PyProxy, prop: any) {
            return (
                Reflect.getOwnPropertyDescriptor(jsobj, prop) ??
                PyProxyJsJsonDictHandlers.getOwnPropertyDescriptor(jsobj, prop)
            );
        },
        ownKeys(jsobj: PyProxy): (string | symbol)[] {
            const result = [
                ...PyProxyHandlers.ownKeys(jsobj),
                ...PyProxyJsJsonDictHandlers.ownKeys(jsobj)
            ];
            // deduplicate
            return Array.from(new Set(result));
        },
    };


The ``IS_ITERABLE`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: javascript

    const pythonNext = makePythonFunction("next");
    const getStopIterationValue = makePythonFunction(`
        def get_stop_iteration_value():
            import sys
            err = sys.last_value
            return err.value
    `);

    function* iterHelper(iter, isJsJson) {
        try {
            while (true) {
                let item = pythonNext(iter);
                if (isJsJson && item.asJsJson) {
                    item = item.asJsJson();
                }
                yield item;
            }
        } catch (e) {
            if (e.type === "StopIteration") {
                return getStopIterationValue();
            }
            throw e;
        }
    }

    const pythonIter = makePythonFunction("iter");
    class PyIterableMixin {
        [Symbol.iterator]() {
            const isJsJson = !!(this.$$flags & (IS_JS_JSON_DICT | IS_JS_JSON_SEQUENCE));
            return iterHelper(pythonIter(this), isJsJson);
        }
    }


The ``IS_ITERATOR`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: javascript

    const pythonSend = makePythonFunction(`
        def python_send(it, val):
            return gen.send(val)
    `);
    class PyIteratorMixin {
        next(x) {
            try {
                const result = pythonSend(this, x);
                return { done: false, value: result };
            } catch (e) {
                if (e.type === "StopIteration") {
                    const result = getStopIterationValue();
                    return { done: true, value: result };
                }
                throw e;
            }
        }
    }


The ``IS_GENERATOR`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: javascript

    const pythonThrow = makePythonFunction(`
        def python_throw(gen, val):
            return gen.throw(val)
    `);
    const pythonClose = makePythonFunction(`
        def python_close(gen):
            return gen.close()
    `);
    class PyGeneratorMixin extends PyIteratorMixin {
        throw(exc) {
            try {
                const result = pythonThrow(this, exc);
                return { done: false, value: result };
            } catch (e) {
                if (e.type === "StopIteration") {
                    const result = getStopIterationValue();
                    return { done: true, value: result };
                }
                throw e;
            }
        }
        return(value) {
            pythonClose(this);
            return { done: true, value }
        }
    }


The ``IS_SEQUENCE`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We define all of the ``Array.prototype`` methods that don't mutate the sequence
on ``PySequenceMixin``. For most of them, the ``Array`` prototype method works
without changes. All of these we define with boilerplate of the form:

.. code-block:: javascript

    [methodName](...args) {
        return Array.prototype[methodName].call(this, ...args)
    }

These include ``join``, ``slice``, ``indexOf``, ``lastIndexOf``, ``forEach``,
``map``, ``filter``, ``some``, ``every``, ``reduce``, ``reduceRight``, ``at``,
``concat``, ``includes``, ``entries``, ``keys``, ``values``, ``find``, and
``findIndex``. Other than these boilerplate methods, the remaining attributes on
``PySequenceMixin`` are as follows.

.. code-block:: javascript

    class PySequenceMixin {
        get [Symbol.isConcatSpreadable]() {
            return true;
        }
        toJSON() {
            return Array.from(this);
        }
        asJsJson() {
            const flags = this.$$flags | IS_JS_JSON_SEQUENCE;
            const { shared, props } = this[pyproxyAttrsSymbol];
            // Note: Because we pass shared down, the PyProxy created here has
            // the same lifetime as the PyProxy it is created from. Destroying
            // either destroys both.
            return createPyProxy(shared.ptr, { flags, shared, props });
        }
        // ... boilerplate methods
    }


Instead of the default proxy handlers, we use the following handlers for
sequences. We don't

.. code-block:: javascript

    const PyProxySequenceHandlers = {
        isExtensible() {
            return true;
        },
        has(jsobj, jskey) {
            if (typeof jskey === "string" && /^[0-9]+$/.test(jskey)) {
                // Note: if the number was negative it didn't match the pattern
                return Number(jskey) < jsobj.length;
            }
            return PyProxyHandlers.has(jsobj, jskey);
        },
        get(jsobj, jskey) {
            if (jskey === "length") {
                return jsobj.length;
            }
            if (typeof jskey === "string" && /^[0-9]+$/.test(jskey)) {
                try {
                    return PyProxyGetItemMixin.prototype.get.call(jsobj, Number(jskey));
                } catch (e) {
                    if (isPythonError(e) && e.type == "IndexError") {
                        return undefined;
                    }
                    throw e;
                }
            }
            return PyProxyHandlers.get(jsobj, jskey);
        },
        set(jsobj: PyProxy, jskey: any, jsval: any): boolean {
            if (typeof jskey === "string" && /^[0-9]+$/.test(jskey)) {
                try {
                    PyProxySetItemMixin.prototype.set.call(jsobj, Number(jskey), jsval);
                    return true;
                } catch (e) {
                    if (isPythonError(e) && e.type == "IndexError") {
                    return false;
                    }
                    throw e;
                }
            }
            return PyProxyHandlers.set(jsobj, jskey, jsval);
        },
        deleteProperty(jsobj: PyProxy, jskey: any): boolean {
            if (typeof jskey === "string" && /^[0-9]+$/.test(jskey)) {
                try {
                    PyProxySetItemMixin.prototype.delete.call(jsobj, Number(jskey));
                    return true;
                } catch (e) {
                    if (isPythonError(e) && e.type == "IndexError") {
                        return false;
                    }
                    throw e;
                }
            }
            return PyProxyHandlers.deleteProperty(jsobj, jskey);
        },
        ownKeys(jsobj: PyProxy): (string | symbol)[] {
            const result = PyProxyHandlers.ownKeys(jsobj);
            result.push(
                ...Array.from({ length: jsobj.length }, (_, k) => k.toString()),
            );
            result.push("length");
            return result;
        },
    };


The ``IS_MUTABLE_SEQUENCE`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This adds some additional ``Array`` methods that mutate the sequence.

.. code-block:: javascript

    class PyMutableSequenceMixin {
        reverse() {
            // Same as the Python reverse method except it returns this instead of undefined
            this.$reverse();
            return this;
        }
            push(...elts: any[]) {
            for (const elt of elts) {
                this.append(elt);
            }
            return this.length;
        }
        splice(start, deleteCount, ...items) {
            if (deleteCount === undefined) {
                // Max signed size
                deleteCount = (1 << 31) - 1;
            }
            let stop = start + deleteCount;
            if (stop > this.length) {
                stop = this.length;
            }
            const pythonSplice = makePythonFunction(`
                def splice(array, start, stop, items):
                    from pyodide.ffi import to_js
                    result = to_js(array[start:stop], depth=1)
                    array[start:stop] = items
                    return result
            `);
            return pythonSplice(this, start, stop, items);
        }
        pop() {
            const pythonPop = makePythonFunction(`
                def pop(array):
                    return array.pop()
            `);
            return pythonPop(this);
        }
        shift() {
            const pythonShift = makePythonFunction(`
                def pop(array):
                    return array.pop(0)
            `);
            return pythonShift(this);
        }
        unshift(...elts) {
            elts.forEach((elt, idx) => {
                this.insert(idx, elt);
            });
            return this.length;
        }
        // Boilerplate methods
        copyWithin(...args): any {
            Array.prototype.copyWithin.apply(this, args);
            return this;
        }
        fill(...args) {
            Array.prototype.fill.apply(this, args);
            return this;
        }
    }

The ``IS_JS_JSON_DICT`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are no methods special to the ``IS_JS_JSON_DICT`` flag, but we use the
following proxy handlers. We prefer to look up a property as an item in the
dictionary with two exceptions:

1. Symbols we always look up on the ``PyProxy`` itself.
2. We also look up the keys ``$$flags``, ``copy()``, ``constructor``,
   ``destroy`` and ``toString`` on the ``PyProxy``.

All Python dictionary methods will be shadowed by a key of the same name.

.. code-block:: javascript

    const PyProxyJsJsonDictHandlers = {
        isExtensible(): boolean {
            return true;
        },
        has(jsobj: PyProxy, jskey: string | symbol): boolean {
            if (PyContainsMixin.prototype.has.call(jsobj, jskey)) {
                return true;
            }
            // If it doesn't exist as a string key and it looks like a number,
            // try again with the number
            if (typeof jskey === "string" && /^-?[0-9]+$/.test(jskey)) {
                return PyContainsMixin.prototype.has.call(jsobj, Number(jskey));
            }
            return false;
        },
        get(jsobj, jskey): any {
            if (
                typeof jskey === "symbol" ||
                ["$$flags", "copy", "constructor", "destroy", "toString"].includes(jskey)
            ) {
                return Reflect.get(...arguments);
            }
            const result = PyProxyGetItemMixin.prototype.get.call(jsobj, jskey);
            if (
                result !== undefined ||
                PyContainsMixin.prototype.has.call(jsobj, jskey)
            ) {
                return result;
            }
            if (typeof jskey === "string" && /^-?[0-9]+$/.test(jskey)) {
                return PyProxyGetItemMixin.prototype.get.call(jsobj, Number(jskey));
            }
            return Reflect.get(...arguments);
        },
        set(jsobj, jskey, jsval): boolean {
            if (typeof jskey === "symbol") {
                return false;
            }
            if (
                !PyContainsMixin.prototype.has.call(jsobj, jskey) &&
                typeof jskey === "string" &&
                /^-?[0-9]+$/.test(jskey)
            ) {
                jskey = Number(jskey);
            }
            try {
                PyProxySetItemMixin.prototype.set.call(jsobj, jskey, jsval);
                return true;
            } catch (e) {
                if (isPythonError(e) && e.type === "KeyError") {
                    return false;
                }
                throw e;
            }
        },
        deleteProperty(jsobj: PyProxy, jskey: string | symbol | number): boolean {
            if (typeof jskey === "symbol") {
                return false;
            }
            if (
                !PyContainsMixin.prototype.has.call(jsobj, jskey) &&
                typeof jskey === "string" &&
                /^-?[0-9]+$/.test(jskey)
            ) {
                jskey = Number(jskey);
            }
            try {
                PyProxySetItemMixin.prototype.delete.call(jsobj, jskey);
                return true;
            } catch (e) {
                if (isPythonError(e) && e.type === "KeyError") {
                    return false;
                }
                throw e;
            }
        },
        getOwnPropertyDescriptor(jsobj: PyProxy, prop: any) {
            if (!PyProxyJsJsonDictHandlers.has(jsobj, prop)) {
                return undefined;
            }
            const value = PyProxyJsJsonDictHandlers.get(jsobj, prop);
            return {
                configurable: true,
                enumerable: true,
                value,
                writable: true,
            };
        },
        ownKeys(jsobj: PyProxy): (string | symbol)[] {
            const pythonDictOwnKeys = makePythonFunction(`
                def dict_own_keys(d):
                    from pyodide.ffi import to_js
                    result = set()
                    for key in d:
                        if isinstance(key, str):
                            result.add(key)
                        elif isinstance(key, (int, float)):
                            result.add(str(key))
                    return to_js(result)
            `);
            return pythonDictOwnKeys(jsobj);
        },
    };


The ``IS_JS_JSON_SEQUENCE`` Mixin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This has no direct impact on the prototype or handlers of the proxy. However,
when indexing the list or iterating over the list we will apply ``asJsJson()``
to the results.

Deep Conversions
----------------

We define ``JsProxy.to_py()`` to make deep conversions from JavaScript to Python
and ``pyodide.ffi.to_js()`` to make deep conversions from Python to JavaScript.
Note that it is not intended that these are inverse functions to each other.

From JavaScript to Python
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``JsProxy.to_py()`` method makes the following conversions:

* ``Array`` ==> ``list``
* ``Map`` ==> ``dict``
* ``Set`` ==> ``set``
* ``Object`` ==> ``dict`` but only if the ``constructor`` is either ``Object``
  or ``undefined``. Other objects we leave alone.

It takes the following optional arguments:

``depth``
    An integer, specifies the maximum depth down to which to convert. For
    instance, setting ``depth=1`` allows converting exactly one level.

``default_converter``
    A function to be called when there is no known conversion for an object.


The default converter takes three arguments:

``jsobj``
    The object to convert.

``convert``
    Allows recursing.

``cache_conversion``
    Cache the conversion of an object to allow converting self-referential data.

For example, if we have a JavaScript ``Pair`` class and want to convert it to a
list, we can use the following ``default_converter``:

.. code-block:: python

    def pair_converter(jsobj, convert, cache_conversion):
        if jsobj.constructor.name != "Pair":
            return jsobj
        result = []
        cache_conversion(jsobj, result)
        result.append(convert(jsobj.first))
        result.append(convert(jsobj.second))
        return result

By first caching the result before making any recursive calls to ``convert``, we
ensure that if ``jsobj.first`` has a transitive reference to ``jsobj``, we
convert it correctly.

Complete pseudocode for the ``to_py`` method is as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    def to_py(jsobj, *, depth=-1, default_converter=None):
        cache = {}
        return ToPyConverter(depth, default_converter).convert(jsobj)

    class ToPyConverter:
        def __init__(self, depth, default_converter):
            self.cache = {}
            self.depth = depth
            self.default_converter = default_converter

        def cache_conversion(self, jsobj, pyobj):
            self.cache[jsobj.js_id] = pyobj

        def convert(self, jsobj):
            if self.depth == 0 or not isinstance(jsobj, JsProxy):
                return jsobj
            if result := self.cache.get(jsobj.js_id):
                return result

            from js import Array, Object
            type_tag = getTypeTag(jsobj)
            self.depth -= 1
            try:
                if Array.isArray(jsobj):
                    return self.convert_list(jsobj)
                if type_tag == "[object Map]":
                    return self.convert_map(jsobj, jsobj.entries())
                if type_tag == "[object Set]":
                    return self.convert_set(jsobj)
                if type_tag == "[object Object]" and (jsobj.constructor in [None, Object]):
                    return self.convert_map(jsobj, Object.entries(jsobj))
                if self.default_converter is not None:
                    return self.default_converter(jsobj, self.convert, self.cache_conversion)
                return jsobj
            finally:
                self.depth += 1

        def convert_list(self, jsobj):
            result = []
            self.cache_conversion(jsobj, result)
            for item in jsobj:
                result.append(self.convert(item))
            return result

        def convert_map(self, jsobj, entries):
            result = {}
            self.cache_conversion(jsobj, result)
            for [key, val] in entries:
                result[key] = self.convert(val)
            return result

        def convert_set(self, jsobj):
            result = set()
            self.cache_conversion(jsobj, result)
            for key in jsobj:
                result.add(self.convert(key))
            return result


From Python to JavaScript
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: python

    def to_js(
        obj,
        /,
        *,
        depth=-1,
        pyproxies=None,
        create_pyproxies=True,
        dict_converter=None,
        default_converter=None,
        eager_converter=None,
    ):
        converter = ToJsConverter(
            depth,
            pyproxies,
            create_pyproxies,
            dict_converter,
            default_converter,
            eager_converter,
        )
        result = converter.convert(obj)
        converter.postprocess()
        return result

    class ToJsConverter:
        def __init__(
            self,
            depth,
            pyproxies,
            create_pyproxies,
            dict_converter,
            default_converter,
            eager_converter,
        ):
            self.depth = depth
            self.pyproxies = pyproxies
            self.create_pyproxies = create_pyproxies
            if dict_converter is None:
                dict_converter = Object.fromEntries
            self.dict_converter = dict_converter
            self.default_converter = default_converter
            self.eager_converter = eager_converter
            self.cache = {}
            self.post_process_list = []
            self.pairs_to_dict_map = {}

        def cache_conversion(self, pyobj, jsobj):
            self.cache[id(pyobj)] = jsobj

        def postprocess(self):
            # Replace any NoValue's that appear once we've certainly computed
            # their correct conversions
            for parent, key, pyobj_id in self.post_process_list:
                real_value = self.cache[pyobj_id]
                # If it was a dictionary, we need to lookup the actual result object
                real_parent = self.pairs_to_dict_map.get(parent.js_id, parent)
                real_parent[key] = real_value

        @contextmanager
        def decrement_depth(self):
            self.depth -= 1
            try:
                yield
            finally:
                self.depth += 1

        def convert(self, pyobj):
            if self.depth == 0 or isinstance(pyobj, JsProxy):
                return pyobj
            if result := self.cache.get(id(pyobj)):
                return result

            with self.decrement_depth():
                if self.eager_converter:
                    return self.eager_converter(
                        pyobj, self.convert_no_eager_public, self.cache_conversion
                    )
                return self.convert_no_eager(pyobj)

        def convert_no_eager_public(self, pyobj):
            with self.decrement_depth():
                return self.convert_no_eager(pyobj)

        def convert_no_eager(self, pyobj):
            if isinstance(pyobj, (tuple, list)):
                return self.convert_sequence(pyobj)
            if isinstance(pyobj, dict):
                return self.convert_dict(pyobj)
            if isinstance(pyobj, set):
                return self.convert_set(pyobj)
            if self.default_converter:
                return self.default_converter(
                    pyobj, self.convert_no_eager_public, self.cache_conversion
                )
            if not self.create_pyproxies:
                raise ConversionError(
                    f"No conversion available for {pyobj!r} and create_pyproxies=False passed"
                )
            result = create_proxy(pyobj)
            if self.pyproxies is not None:
                self.pyproxies.append(result)
            return result

        def convert_sequence(self, pyobj):
            from js import Array

            result = Array.new()
            self.cache_conversion(pyobj, result)
            for idx, val in enumerate(pyobj):
                converted = self.convert(val)
                if converted is NoValue:
                    self.post_process_list.append((result, idx, id(val)))
                result.push(converted)
            return result

        def convert_dict(self, pyobj):
            from js import Array

            # Temporarily store NoValue in the cache since we only get the
            # actual value from dict_converter. We'll replace these with the
            # correct values in the postprocess step
            self.cache_conversion(pyobj, NoValue)
            pairs = Array.new()
            for [key, value] in pyobj.items():
                converted = self.convert(value)
                if converted is NoValue:
                    self.post_process_list.append((pairs, key, id(value)))
                pairs.push(Array.new(key, converted))
            result = self.dict_converter(pairs)
            self.pairs_to_dict_map[pairs.js_id] = result
            # Update the cache to point to the actual result
            self.cache_conversion(pyobj, result)
            return result

        def convert_set(self, pyobj):
            from js import Set
            result = Set.new()
            self.cache_conversion(pyobj, result)
            for key in pyobj:
                if isinstance(key, JsProxy):
                    raise ConversionError(
                        f"Cannot use {key!r} as a key for a JavaScript Set"
                    )
                result.add(key)
            return result


The ``js`` Module
-----------------

The ``js`` module allows us to import objects from JavaScript. The definition is
as follows:

.. code:: python

    import sys
    from _pyodide_core import run_js
    from pyodide.ffi import JsProxy
    from importlib.abc import Loader, MetaPathFinder
    from importlib.util import spec_from_loader

    class JsLoader(Loader):
        def __init__(self, jsproxy):
            self.jsproxy = jsproxy

        def create_module(self, spec):
            return self.jsproxy

        def exec_module(self, module):
            pass

        def is_package(self, fullname):
            return True

    class JsFinder(MetaPathFinder):
        def _get_object(self, fullname):
            [parent, _, child] = fullname.rpartition(".")
            if not parent:
                if child == "js":
                    return run_js("globalThis")
                return None

            parent_module = sys.modules[parent]
            if not isinstance(parent_module, JsProxy):
                # Not one of us.
                return None
            jsproxy = getattr(parent_module, child, None)
            if not isinstance(jsproxy, JsProxy):
                raise ModuleNotFoundError(f"No module named {fullname!r}", name=fullname)
            return jsproxy

        def find_spec(
            self,
            fullname,
            path,
            target,
        ):
            jsproxy = self._get_object(fullname)
            loader = JsLoader(jsproxy)
            return spec_from_loader(fullname, loader, origin="javascript")


    finder = JsFinder()
    sys.meta_path.insert(0, finder)
    del sys.modules["js"]
    import js
    sys.meta_path.remove(finder)
    sys.meta_path.append(finder)

The ``pyodide`` package
-----------------------

This has an empty ``__init__.py`` and two submodules.

The ``pyodide.ffi`` Module
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This has the following properties:

``create_proxy(x)``: This returns ``create_jsproxy(createPyProxy(x))``.

``jsnull``: Special value that converts to/from the JavaScript ``null`` value.

.. code-block:: python

    def destroy_proxies(proxies):
        for proxy in proxies:
            proxy.destroy()

``to_js``: See definition in the section on deep conversions.

``JsArray``: This is ``type(run_js("[]"))``.

``JsCallable``: This is ``type(run_js("() => {}"))``.

``JsDoubleProxy``: This is ``type(create_proxy({}))``.

``JsException``: This is ``type(run_js("new Error()"))``.

``JsGenerator``: This is ``type(run_js("(function*(){})()"))``.

``JsIterable``: This is ``type(run_js("({[Symbol.iterator](){}})"))``.

``JsIterator``: This is ``type(run_js("({next(){}})"))``.

``JsMap``: This is ``type(run_js("({get(){}})"))``.

``JsMutableMap``: This is ``type(run_js("new Map()"))``.

``JsProxy``: This is ``type(run_js("({})"))``

``JsBigInt``: This is defined as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    def _int_to_bigint(x):
        if isinstance(x, int):
            return JsBigInt(x)
        return x

    class JsBigInt(int):
        # unary ops
        def __abs__(self):
            return JsBigInt(int.__abs__(self))

        def __invert__(self):
            return JsBigInt(int.__invert__(self))

        def __neg__(self):
            return JsBigInt(int.__neg__(self))

        def __pos__(self):
            return JsBigInt(int.__pos__(self))

        # binary ops
        def __add__(self, other):
            return _int_to_bigint(int.__add__(self, other))

        def __and__(self, other):
            return _int_to_bigint(int.__and__(self, other))

        def __floordiv__(self, other):
            return _int_to_bigint(int.__floordiv__(self, other))

        def __lshift__(self, other):
            return _int_to_bigint(int.__lshift__(self, other))

        def __mod__(self, other):
            return _int_to_bigint(int.__mod__(self, other))

        def __or__(self, other):
            return _int_to_bigint(int.__or__(self, other))

        def __pow__(self, other, modulus = None):
            return _int_to_bigint(int.__pow__(self, other, modulus))

        def __rshift__(self, other):
            return _int_to_bigint(int.__rshift__(self, other))

        def __sub__(self, other):
            return _int_to_bigint(int.__sub__(self, other))

        def __xor__(self, other):
            return _int_to_bigint(int.__xor__(self, other))


The ``pyodide.code`` Module
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This exposes the ``run_js`` function.

Changes to the ``json`` Module
------------------------------

The ``json`` module will be updated to serialize ``jsnull`` to ``null``.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

This is strictly adding new APIs. There are backwards compatibility concerns for
Pyodide. We will try to ensure that the implementation allows Pyodide to
gradually switch to using the CPython implementation with a minimum amount of
disruption.

Security Implications
=====================

It improves support for one of the few fully sandboxed platforms that Python can
run on.

How to Teach This
=================


Reference Implementation
========================

Pyodide, https://github.com/hoodmane/cpython/tree/js-ffi


Acknowledgments
===============

Mike Droettboom, Roman Yurchak, Gyeongjae Choi, Andrea Giammarchi

Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
